Marjory
By F. Antsey
I have thought myself justified in printing the following narrative, found
among the papers of my dead friend, Douglas Cameron, who left me
discretion to deal with them as I saw fit. It was written indeed, as its
opening words imply, rather for his own solace and relief than with the
expectation that it would be read by any other. But, painful and intimate
as it is in parts, I cannot think that any harm will be done by printing it
now, with some necessary alterations in the names of the characters
chiefly concerned.
Before, however, leaving the story to speak for itself, I should like to
state, in justice to my friend, that during the whole of my acquaintance
with him, which began in our college days, I never saw anything to
indicate the morbid timidity and weakness of character that seem to have
marked him as a boy. Reserved he undoubtedly was, with a taste for
solitude that made him shrink from the society of all but a small circle,
and with a sensitive and shy nature which prevented him from doing
himself complete justice; but he was very capable of holding his own on
occasion, and in his disposition, as I knew it, there was no want of moral
courage, nor any trace of effeminacy.
How far he may have unconsciously exaggerated such failings in the
revelation of his earlier self, or what the influence of such an experience
as he relates may have done to strengthen the moral fibre, are points on
which I can express no opinion, any more than I can pledge myself to the
credibility of the supernatural element of his story.
It may be that only in the boy's overwrought imagination, the innocent
Child-spirit came back to complete the work of love and pity she had
begun in life; but I know that he himself believed otherwise, and, truly, if
those who leave us are permitted to return at all, it must be on some
such errand as Marjory's.
Douglas Cameron's life was short, and in it, so far as I am aware, he met
no one who at all replaced his lost ideal. Of this I cannot be absolutely
certain, for he was a reticent man in such matters; but I think, had it
been so, I should have known of it, for we were very close friends. One

would hardly expect, perhaps, that an ordinary man would remain faithful
all his days to the far-off memory of a child-love; but then Cameron was
not quite as other men, nor were his days long in the land.
And if this ideal of his was never dimmed for him by some grosser, and
less spiritual, passion, who shall say that he may not have been a better
and even a happier man in consequence.
*****
It is not without an effort that I have resolved to break, in the course of
this narrative, the reserve maintained for nearly twenty years. But the
chief reason for silence is removed now that all those are gone who might
have been pained or harmed by what I have to tell, and, though I shrink
still from reviving certain memories that are fraught with pain, there are
others associated therewith which will surely bring consolation and relief.
I must have been about eleven at the time I am speaking of, and the
change which--for good or ill--comes over most boys' lives had not yet
threatened mine. I had not left home for school, nor did it seem at all
probable then that I should ever do so.
When I read (I was a great reader) of Dotheboys Hall and Salem House-a combination of which establishments formed my notion of school-life--it
was with no more personal interest than a cripple might feel in perusing
the notice of an impending conscription; for from the battles of school-life
I was fortunately exempted.
I was the only son of a widow, and we led a secluded life in a London
suburb. My mother took charge of my education herself, and, as far as
mere acquirements went, I was certainly not behind other boys of my
age. I owe too much to that loving and careful training, Heaven knows, to
think of casting any reflection upon it here, but my surroundings were
such as almost necessarily to exclude all bracing and hardening
influences.
My mother had few friends; we were content with our own
companionship, and of boys I knew and cared to know nothing; in fact, I
regarded a strange boy with much the same unreasoning aversion as
many excellent women feel for the most ordinary cow.

I was happy to think that I should never be called upon to associate with
them; by-and-by, when I outgrew my mother's teaching, I was to have a
tutor, perhaps even go to college in time, and when I became a man I
was to be a curate and live with my mother in a clematis-covered cottage
in some pleasant village.
She would often dwell on this future with a tender prospective pride; she
spoke of it on the very day that saw it shattered for ever.
For there came a morning when, on going to her with my lessons for the
day, I was gladdened with an unexpected holiday. I little knew then-though I was to learn it soon enough--that my lessons had been all
holidays, or that on that day they were to end for ever.
My mother had had one or two previous attacks of an illness which
seemed to prostrate her for a short period, and as she soon regained her
ordinary health, I did not think they could be of a serious nature.
So I devoted my holiday cheerfully enough to the illumination of a text,
on the gaudy colouring of which I found myself gazing two days later with
a dull wonder, as at the work of a strange hand in a long dead past, for
the boy who had painted that was a happy boy who had a mother, and for
two endless days I had been alone.
Those days, and many that followed, come back to me now but vaguely. I
passed them mostly in a state of blank bewilderment caused by the
double sense of sameness and strangeness in everything around me;
then there were times when this gave way to a passionate anguish which
refused all attempts at comfort, and times even--but very, very seldom-when I almost forgot what had happened to me.
Our one servant remained in the house with me, and a friend and
neighbour of my mother's was constant in her endeavours to relieve my
loneliness; but I was impatient of them, I fear, and chiefly anxious to be
left alone to indulge my melancholy unchecked.
I remember how, as autumn began, and leaf after leaf fluttered down
from the trees in our little garden, I watched them fall with a heavier
heart, for they had known my mother, and now they, too, were deserting
me.

This morbid state of mind had lasted quite long enough when my uncle,
who was my guardian, saw fit to put a summary end to it by sending me
to school forthwith; he would have softened the change for me by taking
me to his own home first, but there was illness of some sort there, and
this was out of the question.
I was neither sorry nor glad when I heard of it, for all places were the
same to me just then; only, as the time drew near, I began to regard the
future with a growing dread.
The school was at some distance from London, and my uncle took me
down by rail; but the only fact I remember connected with the journey is
that there was a boy in the carriage with us who cracked walnuts all the
way, and I wondered if he was going to school too, and concluded that he
was not, or he would hardly eat quite so many walnuts.
Later we were passing through some wrought-iron gates, and down an
avenue of young chestnuts, which made a gorgeous autumn canopy of
scarlet, amber, and orange, up to a fine old red-brick house, with a highpitched roof, and a cupola in which a big bell hung, tinted a warm gold by
the afternoon sun.
This was my school, and it did not look so very-terrible after all. There
was a big bow-window by the pillared portico, and, looking timidly in, I
saw a girl of about my own age sitting there, absorbed in the book she
was reading, her long brown hair drooping over her cheek and the hand
on which it rested.
She glanced up at the sound of the door-bell, and I felt her eyes
examining me seriously and critically, and then I forgot everything but
the fact that I was about to be introduced to my future schoolmaster, the
Rev. Basil Dering.
This was less of an ordeal than I had expected; he had a strong,
massively-cut, leonine face, free and abundant white hair, streaked with
dark grey, but there was a kind light in his eyes as I looked up at them,
and the firm mouth could smile, I found, pleasantly enough.
Mrs. Dering seemed younger, and was handsome, with a certain
stateliness and decision of manner which put me less at my ease, and I

was relieved to be told I might say good-bye to my uncle, and wander
about the grounds as I liked.
I was not surprised to pass through an empty schoolroom, and to descend
by some steep stairs to a deserted playground, for we had been already
told that the Michaelmas holidays were not over, and that the boys would
not return for some days to come.
It gave me a kind of satisfaction to think of my resemblance, just then, to
my favourite David Copperfield, but I was to have a far pleasanter
companion than poor lugubrious, flute-tootling Mr. Mell, for as I paced the
damp paths paved with a mosaic of russet and yellow leaves, I heard light
footsteps behind me, and turned to find myself face to face with the girl I
had seen at the window.
She stood there breathless for an instant, for she had hurried to overtake
me, and against a background of crimson creepers I saw the brilliant face,
with its soft but fearless brown eyes, small straight nose, spirited mouth,
and crisp wavy golden-brown hair, which I see now almost as distinctly as
I write.
'You're the new boy,' she said at length. 'I've come out to make you feel
more at home. I suppose you don't feel _quite_ at home just yet?'
'Not quite, thank you,' I said, lifting my cap with ceremony, for I had
been taught to be particular about my manners; 'I have never been to
school before, you see, Miss Dering.'
I think she was a little puzzled by so much politeness. 'I know,' she said
softly; 'mother told me about it, and I'm very sorry. And I'm called
Marjory, generally. Shall you like school, do you think?'
'I might,' said I, 'if--if it wasn't for the boys!'
'Boys aren't bad,' she said; 'ours are rather nice, I think. But perhaps you
don't know many?'
'I know one,' I replied.
'How old is _he_?' she wished to know.

'Not very old--about three, I think,' I said. I had never wished till then
that my only male acquaintance had been of less tender years, but I felt
now that he was rather small, and saw that Marjory was of the same
opinion.
'Why, he's only a baby!' she said; 'I thought you meant a _real_ boy. And
is that all the boys you know? Are you fond of games?'
'Some games--very,' said I.
'What's your favourite game?' she demanded.
'Bezique,' I answered, 'or draughts.'
'I meant _out_door games; draughts are indoor games--_is_ indoor
games, I mean--no, _are_ an indoor game--and _that_ doesn't sound
grammar! But haven't you ever played cricket? Not ever, really? I like it
dreadfully myself, only I'm not allowed to play with the boys, and I'm
sure I can bat well enough for the second eleven--Cartwright said I could
last term--and I can bowl round-hand, and it's all no use, just because I
was born a girl! Wouldn't you like a game at something? They haven't
taken in the croquet hoops yet; shall we play at that?'
But again I had to confess my ignorance of what was then the popular
garden game.
'What do you generally do to amuse yourself, then?' she inquired.
'I read, generally, or paint texts or outlines. Sometimes'--(I thought this
accomplishment would surely appeal to her)--'sometimes I do woolwork!'
'I don't think I would tell the boys that,' she advised rather gravely; she
evidently considered me a very desperate case. 'It's such a pity, your not
knowing any games. Suppose I taught you croquet, now? It would be
something to go on with, and you'll soon learn if you pay attention and do
exactly what I tell you.'
I submitted myself meekly to her direction, and Marjory enjoyed her
office of instructress for a time, until my extreme slowness wore out her
patience, and she began to make little murmurs of disgust, for which she
invariably apologised. 'That's enough for to-day!' she said at last, 'I'll take

you again to-morrow. But you really must try and pick up games,
Cameron, or you'll never be liked. Let me see, I wonder if there's time to
teach you a little football. I think I could do that.'
Before she could make any further arrangements the tea-bell rang, but
when I lay down that night in my strange cold bed, hemmed round by
other beds, which were only less formidable than if they had been
occupied, I did not feel so friendless as I might have done, and dreamed
all night that Marjory was teaching me something I understood to be
cricket, which, however, was more like a bloated kind of backgammon.
The next day Marjory was allowed to go out walking with me, and I came
home feeling that I had known her for quite a long time, while her
manner to me had acquired a tone even more protecting than before, and
she began to betray an anxiety as to my school prospects which filled me
with uneasiness.
'I am so afraid the boys won't like the way you talk,' she said on one
occasion.
'I used to be told I spoke very correctly,' I said, verdantly enough.
'But not like boys talk. You see, Cameron, I ought to know, with such a
lot of them about. I tell you what I could do, though--I could teach you
most of their words--only I must run and ask mother first if I may.
Teaching slang isn't the same as using it on my own account, is it?'
Marjory darted off impulsively to ask leave, to return presently with a
slow step and downcast face. 'I mayn't,' she announced. 'Mother says
"Certainly not," so there's an end of that! Still, I think myself it's a
decided pity.'
And more than once that day she would observe, as if to herself, 'I do
wish they had let him come to school in different collars!'
I knew that these remarks, and others of a similar tendency, were
prompted by her interest in my welfare, and I admired her too heartily
already to be offended by them: still, I cannot say they added to my
peace of mind.

And on the last evening of the holidays she said 'Good-night' to me with
some solemnity. 'Everything will be different after this,' she said; 'I shan't
be able to see nearly so much of you, because I'm not allowed to be
much with the boys. But I shall be looking after you all the time,
Cameron, and seeing how you get on. And oh! I do hope you will try to be
a popular kind of boy!'
*****
I'm afraid I must own that this desire of Marjory's was not realised. I do
not know that I tried to be--and I certainly was not--a popular boy.
The other boys, I now know, were by no means bad specimens of the
English schoolboy, as will be evident when I state that, for a time, my
deep mourning was held by them to give me a claim to their forbearance.
But I had an unfortunate tendency to sudden floods of tears (apparently
for no cause whatever, really from some secret spring of association, such
as I remember was touched when I first found myself learning Latin from
the same primer over which my mother and I had puzzled together), and
these outbursts at first aroused my companions' contempt, and finally
their open ridicule.
I could not conceal my shrinking dislike to their society, which was not
calculated to make them more favourably disposed towards me; while my
tastes, my expressions, my ways of looking at things, were all at total
variance with their own standards.
The general disapproval might well have shown itself in a harsher manner
than that of merely ignoring my existence--and it says much for the tone
of the school that it did not; unfortunately, I felt their indifference almost
as keenly as I had dreaded their notice.
From my masters I met with more favour, for I had been thoroughly well
grounded, and found, besides, a temporary distraction in my school-work;
but this was hardly likely to render me more beloved by my fellows, and
so it came to pass that every day saw my isolation more complete.
Something, however, made me anxious to hide this from Marjory's eyes,
and whenever she happened to be looking on at us in the school grounds
or the playing fields, I made dismal attempts to appear on terms of

equality with the rest, and would hang about a group with as much
pretence of belonging to it as I thought at all prudent.
If she had had more opportunities of questioning me, she would have
found me out long before; as it was, the only occasion on which we were
near one another was at the weekly drawing lesson, when, although she
drew less and talked more than the Professor quite approved of, she was
obliged to restrict herself to a conversation which did not admit of
confidences.
But this negative neutral-tinted misery was not to last; I was harmless
enough, but then to some natures nothing is so offensive as
inoffensiveness. My isolation was certain to raise me up an enemy in
time, and he came in the person of one Clarence Ormsby.
He was a sturdy, good-looking fellow, about two years older than myself,
good at games, and, though not brilliant in other respects, rather idle
than dull. He was popular in the school, and I believe his general
disposition was by no means bad; but there must have been some hidden
flaw in his nature which might never have disclosed itself for any other
but me.
For me he had displayed, almost from the first, one of those special
antipathies that want but little excuse to ripen into hatred. My personal
appearance--I had the misfortune to be a decidedly plain boy--happened
to be particularly displeasing to him, and, as he had an unsparing tongue,
he used it to cover me with ridicule, until gradually, finding that I did not
retaliate, he indulged in acts of petty oppression which, though not
strictly bullying, were even more harassing and humiliating.
I suspect now that if I had made ever so slight a stand at the outset, I
should have escaped further molestation, but I was not pugnacious by
nature, and never made the experiment; partly, probably, from a theory
on which I had been reared, that all violence was vulgar, but chiefly from
a tendency, unnatural in one of my age and sex, to find a sentimental
satisfaction in a certain degree of unhappiness.
So that I can neither pity myself nor expect pity from others for woes
which were so essentially my own creation, though they resulted, alas! in
misery that was real enough.

It was inevitable that quick-sighted Marjory should discover the
subjection into which I had fallen, and her final enlightenment was
brought about in this manner. Ormsby and I were together alone, shortly
before morning school, and he came towards me with an exercise of mine
from which he had just been copying his own, for we were in the same
classes, despite the difference in our ages, and he was in the habit of
profiting thus by my industry.
'Thanks, Cameron,' he said, with a sweetness which I distrusted, for he
was not as a rule so lavish in his gratitude. 'I've copied out that exercise
of yours, but it's written so beastly badly that you'd better do it over
again.'
With which he deliberately tore the page he had been copying from to
scraps, which he threw in my face, and strolled out down to the
playground.
I was preparing submissively to do the exercise over again as well as I
could in the short time that was left, when I was startled by a low cry of
indignation, and, looking round, saw Marjory standing in the doorway,
and knew by her face that she had seen all.
'Has Ormsby done that to you before?' she inquired.
'Once or twice he has,' said I.
'And you let him!' she cried. 'Oh, Cameron!'
'What can I do?' I said.
'I know what _I_ would do,' she replied. 'I would slap his face, or pinch
him. I wouldn't put up with it!'
'Boys don't slap one another, or pinch,' I said, not displeased to find a
weak place in her knowledge of us.
'Well, they do _something_!' she said; 'a real boy would. But I don't think
you are a real boy, Cameron. _I'll_ show you what to do. Where's the
exercise that--that _pig_ copied? Ah! I see it. And now--look!' (Here she
tore his page as he had torn mine.)

'Now for an envelope!' and from the Doctor's own desk she took an
envelope, in which she placed the fragments, and wrote on the outside in
her round, childish hand: 'With Marjory's compliments, for being a bully.'
'He won't do that again,' she said gleefully.
'He'll do worse,' I said in dismay; 'I shall have to pay for it. Marjory, why
didn't you leave things alone? I didn't complain--you know I didn't.'
She turned upon me, as well she might, in supreme disdain. 'Oh! what a
coward you are! I wouldn't believe all Cartwright told me about you when
I asked--but I see it's all true. Why don't you stick up for yourself?'
I muttered something or other.
'But you _ought_ to. You'll never get on unless,' said Marjory, very
decidedly. 'Now, promise me you will, next time.'
I sat there silent. I was disgusted with myself, and meanly angry with her
for having rendered me so.
'Then, listen,' she said impressively. 'I promised I would look after you,
and I did mean to, but it's no use if you won't help yourself. So, unless
you say you won't go on being a coward any more, I shall have to leave
you to your own way, and not take the least interest in you ever again.'
'Then, you may,' I said stolidly; 'I don't care.' I wondered, even while I
spoke the words, what could be impelling me to treat spirited, warmhearted Marjory like that, and I hate myself still at the recollection.
'Good-bye, then,' she said very quietly; 'I'm sorry, Cameron.' And she
went out without another word.
When Ormsby came in, I watched him apprehensively as he read the
envelope upon his desk and saw its contents. He said nothing, however,
though he shot a malignant glance in my direction; but the lesson was not
lost upon him, for from that time he avoided all open ill-treatment of me,
and even went so far as to assume a friendliness which might have
reassured me had I not instinctively felt that it merely masked the old
dislike.

I was constantly the victim of mishaps, in the shape of missing and
defaced books, ink mysteriously spilt or strangely adulterated, and,
though I could never trace them to any definite hand, they seemed too
systematic to be quite accidental; still I made no sign, and hoped thus to
disarm my persecutor--if persecutor there were.
As for my companions, I knew that in no case would they take the trouble
to interfere in my behalf; they had held aloof from the first, the general
opinion (which I now perceive was not unjust) being that 'I deserved all I
got.'
And my estrangement from Marjory grew wider and wider; she never
spoke to me now when we sat near one another at the drawing-class; if
she looked at me it was by stealth, and with a glance that I thought
sometimes was contemptuously pitiful, and sometimes half fancied
betrayed a willingness to return to the old comradeship.
But I nursed my stupid, sullen pride, though my heart ached with it at
times. For I had now come to love Marjory devotedly, with a love that,
though I was a boy and she was a child, was as genuine as any I am ever
likely to feel again.
The chance of seeing her now and then, of hearing her speak--though it
was not to me--gave me the one interest in my life, which, but for her, I
could hardly have borne. But this love of mine was a very far-off and
disinterested worship after all. I could not imagine myself ever speaking
of it to her, or picture her as accepting it. Marjory was too thorough a
child to be vulgarised in that way, even in thought.
The others were healthy, matter-of-fact youths, to whom Marjory was an
ordinary girl, and who certainly did not indulge in any strained sentiment
respecting her; it was left for me to idealise her; but of that, at least, I
cannot feel ashamed, or believe that it did me anything but good.
And the days went on, until it wanted but a fortnight to Christmas, and
most of us were thinking of the coming holidays, and preparing with a not
unpleasant excitement for the examinations, which were all that barred
the way to them now. I was to spend my Christmas with my uncle and
cousins, who would by that time be able to receive me; but I felt no very
pleasurable anticipations, for my cousins were all boys, and from boys I
thought I knew what to expect.

One afternoon Ormsby came to me with the request that I would execute
a trifling commission for him in the adjoining village; he himself, he said,
was confined to bounds, but he had a shilling he wanted to lay out at a
small fancy-shop we were allowed to patronise, and he considered me the
best person to be entrusted with that coin. I was simply to spend the
money on anything I thought best, for he had entire confidence, he gave
me to understand, in my taste and judgment. I think I suspected a design
of some sort, but I did not dare to refuse, and then his manner to some
extent disarmed me.
I took the shilling, therefore, with which I bought some article--I forget
what--and got back to the school at dusk. The boys had all gone down to
tea except Ormsby, who was waiting for me up in the empty schoolroom.
'Well?' he said, and I displayed my purchase, only to find that I had fallen
into a trap.
When I think how easily I was the dupe of that not too subtle artifice,
which was only half malicious, I could smile, if I did not know how it
ended.
'How much was that?' he asked contemptuously, 'twopence-halfpenny?
Well, if you choose to give a shilling for it, I'm not going to pay, that's all.
So just give me back my shilling!'
Now, as my weekly allowance consisted of threepence, which was
confiscated for some time in advance (as I think he knew), to provide
fines for my mysteriously-stained dictionaries, this was out of the
question, as I represented.
'Then go back to the shop and change it,' said he; 'I won't have that
thing!'
'Tell me what you would like instead, and I will,' I stipulated, not
unreasonably.
He laughed; his little scheme was working so admirably. 'That's not the
bargain,' he said; 'you're bound to get me something I like. I'm not
obliged to tell you what it is.'

But even I was driven to protest against such flagrant unfairness. 'I didn't
know you meant that,' I said, 'or I'm sure I shouldn't have gone. I went
to oblige _you_, Ormsby.'
'No, you didn't,' he said, 'you went because I told you. And you'll go
again.'
'Not unless you tell me what I'm to get,' I said.
'I tell you what I believe,' he said; 'you never spent the whole shilling at
all on that; you bought something for yourself with the rest, you young
swindler! No wonder you won't go back to the shop.'
This was, of course, a mere taunt flung out by his inventive fancy; but as
he persisted in it, and threatened exposure and a variety of
consequences, I became alarmed, for I had little doubt that, innocent as I
was, I could be made very uncomfortable by accusations which would find
willing hearers.
He stood there enjoying my perplexity and idly twisting a piece of string
round and round his fingers. At length he said, 'Well, I don't want to be
hard on you. You may go and change this for me even now, if you like. I'll
give you three minutes to think it over, and you can come down into the
playground when I sing out, and tell me what you mean to do. And you
had better be sharp in coming, too, or it will be the worse for you.'
He took his cap, and presently I heard him going down the steps to the
playground. I would have given worlds to go and join the rest at tea, but I
did not dare, and remained in the schoolroom, which was dim just then,
for the gas was lowered; and while I stood there by the fireplace,
trembling in the cold air which stole in through the door Ormsby had left
open, Marjory came in by the other one, and was going straight to her
father's desk, when she saw me.
Her first impulse seemed to be to take no notice, but something in my
face or attitude made her alter her mind and come straight to me, holding
out her hand.
'Cameron,' she said, 'shall we be friends again?'
'Yes, Marjory,' I said; I could not have said any more just then.

'You look so miserable, I couldn't bear it any longer,' she said, 'so I _had_
to make it up. You know, I was only pretending crossness, Cameron, all
the time, because I really thought it was best. But it doesn't seem to have
done you much good, and I did promise to take care of you. What is it?
Ormsby again?'
'Yes,' I said, and told her the story of the commission.
'Oh, you stupid boy!' she cried, 'couldn't you see he only wanted to pick a
quarrel? And if you change it now, he'll make you change it again, and
the next time, and the next after that--I know he will!'
Here Ormsby's voice shouted from below, 'Now then, you, Cameron,
time's up!'
'What is he doing down there?' asked Marjory, and her indignation rose
higher when she heard.
'Now, Cameron, be brave; go down and tell him once for all he may just
keep what he has, and be thankful. Whatever it is, it's good enough for
_him_, I'm sure!'
But I still hung back. 'It's no use, Marjory, he'll tell everyone I cheated
him--he says he will!'
'That he shall not!' she cried; 'I won't have it, I'll go myself, and tell him
what I think of him, and make him stop treating you like this.'
Some faint glimmer of manliness made me ashamed to allow her thus to
fight my battles. 'No, Marjory, not you!' I said; 'I will go: I'll say what you
want me to say!'
But it was too late. I saw her for just a second at the door, my impetuous,
generous little Marjory, as she flung back her pretty hair in a certain
spirited way she had, and nodded to me encouragingly.
And then--I can hardly think of it calmly even now--there came a sharp
scream, and the sound of a fall, and, after that, silence.

Sick with fear, I rushed to the head of the steps, and looked down into
the brown gloom.
'Keep where you are for a minute!' I heard Ormsby cry out. 'It's all right-she's not hurt; now you can come down.'
I was down in another instant, at the foot of the stairs, where, in a patch
of faint light that fell from the door above, lay Marjory, with Ormsby
bending over her insensible form.
'She's dead!' I cried in my terror, as I saw her white face.
'I tell you she's all right,' said he, impatiently; 'there's nothing to make a
fuss about. She slipped coming down and cut her forehead--that's all.'
'Marjory, speak to me--don't look like that; tell me you're not much hurt!'
I implored her; but she only moaned a little, and her eyes remained fast
shut.
'It's no use worrying her now, you know,' said Ormsby, more gently. 'Just
help me to get her round to the kitchen door, and tell somebody.'
We carried her there between us, and, amidst a scene of terrible
confusion and distress, Marjory, still insensible, was carried into the
library, and a man sent off in hot haste for the surgeon.
A little later Ormsby and I were sent for to the study, where Dr. Dering,
whose face was white and drawn as I had never seen it before,
questioned us closely as to our knowledge of the accident.
Ormsby could only say that he was out in the playground, when he saw
somebody descending the steps, and heard a fall, after which he ran up
and found Marjory.
'I sent her into the schoolroom to bring my paper-knife,' said the Doctor;
'if I had but gone myself--! But why should she have gone outside on a
frosty night like this?'
'Oh, Dr. Dering!' I broke out, 'I'm afraid--I'm afraid she went for me!'

I saw Ormsby's face as I spoke, and there was a look upon it which made
me pity him.
'And you sent my poor child out on your errand, Cameron! Could you not
have done it yourself?'
'I wish I had!' I exclaimed; 'oh, I wish I had! I tried to stop her, and then-and then it was too late. Please tell me, sir, is she badly hurt?'
'How can I tell?' he said harshly; 'there, I can't speak of this just yet: go,
both of you.'
There was little work done at evening preparation that night; the whole
school was buzzing with curiosity and speculation, as we heard doors
opening and shutting around, and the wheels of the doctor's gig as it
rolled up the chestnut avenue.
I sat with my hands shielding my eyes and ears, engaged to all
appearance with the books before me, while my restless thoughts were
employed in making earnest resolutions for the future.
At last I saw my cowardice in its true light, and felt impatient to tell
Marjory that I did so, to prove to her that I had really reformed; but when
would an opportunity come? I might not see her again for days, perhaps
not at all till after the holidays; but I would not let myself dwell upon such
a contingency as that, and, to banish it, tried to picture what Marjory
would say, and how she would look, when I was allowed to see her again.
After evening prayers, read by one of the assistant-masters, for the
Doctor did not appear again, we were enjoined to go up to our bedrooms
with as little noise as possible, and we had been in bed some time before
Sutcliffe, the old butler, came up as usual to put out the lights.
On this occasion he was assailed by a fire of eager whispers from every
door: 'Sutcliffe, hi! old Sutty, how is she?' but he did not seem to hear,
until a cry louder than the rest brought him to our room.
'For God's sake, gentlemen, don't!' he said, in a hoarse whisper, as he
turned out the light; 'they'll hear you downstairs.'
'But how is she? do you know--better?'

'Ay,' he said, 'she's better. She'll be over her trouble soon, will Miss
Marjory!'
A low murmur of delight ran round the room, which the butler tried to
check in vain.
'Don't!' he said again, 'wait--wait till morning.... Go to sleep quiet now,
and I'll come up first thing and tell you.'
He had no sooner turned his back than the general relief broke out
irrepressibly; Ormsby being especially demonstrative. 'Didn't I tell you
fellows so?' he said triumphantly; 'as if it was likely a plucky girl like
Marjory would mind a little cut like that. She'll be all right in the morning,
you see!'
But this confidence jarred upon me, who could not pretend to share it,
until I was unable to restrain the torturing anxiety I felt.
'You're wrong--all of you!' I cried, 'I'm sure she's not better. Didn't you
hear how Sutcliffe said it? She's _worse_--she may even be dying!'
I met with the usual treatment of a prophet of evil. 'You young muff,' I
was told on all sides, 'who asked your opinion? Who are you, to know
better than anyone else?'
Ormsby attacked me hotly for trying to excite a groundless alarm, and I
was recommended to hold my tongue and go to sleep.
I said no more, but I could not sleep; the others dropped off one by one,
Ormsby being the last; but I lay awake listening and thinking, until the
dread and suspense grew past bearing. I _must_ know the truth. I would
go down and find the Doctor, and beg him to tell me; he might be angry
and punish me--but that would be nothing in comparison with the relief of
knowing my fear was unfounded.
Stealthily I slipped out of bed, stole through the dim room to the door,
and down the old staircase, which creaked under my bare feet. The dog in
the yard howled as I passed the big window, through which the stars
were sparkling frostily in the keen blue sky. Outside the room in which

Marjory lay, I listened, but could hear nothing. At least she was sleeping,
then, and, relieved already, I went on down to the hall.
The big clock on a table there was ticking solemnly, like a slow footfall;
the lamp was alight, so the Doctor must be still up. With a heart that beat
loudly I went to his study door and lifted my hand to knock, when from
within rose a sound at which the current of my blood stopped and ran
backwards--the terrible, heartbroken grief of a grown man.
Boy as I was, I felt that an agony like that was sacred; besides, I knew
the worst then.
I dragged myself upstairs again, cold to the bones, with a brain that was
frozen too. My one desire was to reach my bed, cover my face, and let
the tears flow; though, when I did regain it, no tears and no thoughts
came. I lay there and shivered for some time, with a stony, stunned
sensation, and then I slept--as if Marjory were well.
The next morning the bell under the cupola did not clang, and Sutcliffe
came up with the direction that we were to go down very quietly, and not
to draw up the window-blinds; and then we all knew what had happened
during the night.
There was a very genuine grief, though none knew Marjory as I had
known her; the more emotional wept, the older ones indulged in little
semi-pious conventional comments, oddly foreign to their usual tone; all-even the most thoughtless--felt the same hush and awe overtake them.
I could not cry; I felt nothing, except a dull rage at my own insensibility.
Marjory was dead--and I had no tears.
Morning school was a mere pretence that day; we dreaded, for almost the
first time, to see the Doctor's face, but he did not show himself, and the
arrangements necessary for the breaking-up of the school were made by
the matron.
Some, including Ormsby and myself, could not be taken in for some days,
during which we had to remain at the school: days of shadow and
monotony, with occasional ghastly outbreaks of the high spirits which
nothing could repress, even in that house of mourning.

But the time passed at last, until it was the evening of the day on which
Marjory had been left to her last sleep.
The poor father and mother had been unable to stay in the house now
that it no longer covered even what had been their child; and the only
two, besides the matron and a couple of servants who still remained
there, were Ormsby and I, who were both to leave on the following
morning.
I would rather have been alone just then with anyone but Ormsby,
though he had never since that fatal night taken the slightest notice of
me; he looked worn and haggard to a degree that made me sure he must
have cared more for Marjory than I could have imagined, and yet he
would break at times into a feverish gaiety which surprised and repelled
me.
He was in one of these latter moods that evening, as we sat, as far apart
as possible, in the empty, firelit schoolroom.
'Now, Cameron,' he said, as he came up to me and struck me boisterously
on the shoulder, 'wake up, man! I've been in the blues long enough. We
can't go on moping always, on the night before the holidays, too! Do
something to make yourself sociable--talk, can't you?'
'No, I can't,' I said; and, breaking from him, went to one of the windows
and looked vacantly out into blackness, which reflected the long room,
with its dingy greenish maps, and the desks and forms glistening in the
fire-beams.
The ice-bound state in which I had been so long was slowly passing away,
now that the scene by the little grave that raw, cheerless morning had
brought home remorselessly the truth that Marjory was indeed gone--lost
to me for ever.
I could see now what she had been to me; how she had made my great
loneliness endurable; how, with her innocent, fearless nature, she had
tried to rouse me from spiritless and unmanly dejection. And I could
never hope to please her now by proving that I had learnt the lesson; she
had gone from me to some world infinitely removed, in which I was
forgotten, and my pitiful trials and struggles could be nothing to her any
more!

I was once more alone, and this second bereavement revived in all its
crushing desolation the first bitter loss which it so closely followed.
So, as I stood there at the window, my unnatural calm could hold out no
longer; the long-frozen tears thawed, and I could weep for the first time
since Marjory died.
But I was not allowed to sorrow undisturbed; I felt a rough grasp on my
arm, as Ormsby asked me angrily, 'What's the matter now?'
'Oh, Marjory, come to me!' I could only cry; 'I can't bear it! I can't! I
can't!'
'Stop that, do you hear?' he said savagely, 'I won't have it! Who are you
to cry about her, when--but for _you_----'
He got no farther; the bitter truth in such a taunt, coming from him,
stung me to ungovernable rage. I turned and struck him full in the mouth,
which I cut open with my clenched hand.
His eyes became all pupil. 'You shall pay me for that!' he said through his
teeth; and, forcing me against a desk, he caught up a large T-square
which lay near; he was far the stronger, and I felt myself powerless in his
grasp. Passion and pain had made him beside himself for the moment,
and he did not know how formidable a weapon the heavily-weighted
instrument might become in his hand.
I shut my eyes: I think I rather hoped he would kill me, and then perhaps
I might go where Marjory was. I did not cry for help, and it would have
been useless if I had done so, for the schoolroom was a long way from
the kitchen and offices of that rambling old house.
But before the expected blow was dealt I felt his grasp relax, and heard
the instrument fall with a sudden clatter on the floor. 'Look,' he
whispered, in a voice I did not recognise, '_look there_!'
And when I opened my eyes, I saw Marjory standing between us!
She looked just as I had always seen her: I suppose that even the afterlife could not make Marjory look purer, or more lovely than she was on

earth. My first feeling was a wild conviction that it had all been some
strange mistake--that Marjory was not dead.
'Marjory, Marjory!' I cried in my joy, 'is it really you? You have come
back, after all, and it is not true!'
She looked at us both without speaking for a moment; her dear brown
eyes had lost their old childish sparkle, and were calm and serious as if
with a deeper knowledge.
Ormsby had cowered back to the opposite wall, covering his face. 'Go
away!' he gasped. 'Cameron--_you_ ask her to go. She--she liked you....
I never meant it. Tell her I never meant to do it!'
I could not understand such terror at the sight of Marjory, even if she had
been what he thought her; but there was a reason in his case.
'You were going to hurt Cameron,' said Marjory, at length, and her voice
sounded sad and grave and far-away.
'I don't care, Marjory,' I cried, 'not now you are here!'
She motioned me back: 'You must not come nearer,' she said. 'I cannot
stay long, and I must speak to Ormsby. Ormsby, have you told anyone?'
'No,' he said, shaking all over, 'it could do no good.... I thought I needn't.'
'Tell _him_,' said Marjory.
'Must I? Oh, no, no!' he groaned, 'don't make me do that!'
'You must,' she answered, and he turned to me with a sullen fear.
'It was like this,' he began; 'that night, when I was waiting for you down
there--I had some string, and it struck me, all in a moment, that it would
be fun to trip you up. I didn't mean to hurt you--only frighten you. I
fastened the string across a little way from the bottom. And then'--he had
to moisten his lips before he could go on--'then _she_ came down, and I
tried to catch her--and couldn't--no, I couldn't!'
'Is that all?' asked Marjory, as he stopped short.

'I cut the string and hid it before you came. Now you know, and you may
tell if you like!'
'Cameron, you will never tell, will you--as long as he lives?' said Marjory.
'You must promise.'
I was horrified by what I had heard; but her eyes were upon me, and I
promised.
'And you, Ormsby, promise me to be kinder to him after this.'
He could not speak; but he made a sign of assent.
'And now,' said Marjory, 'shake hands with him and forgive him.'
But I revolted: 'No, Marjory, I can't; not now--when I know this!'
'Cameron, dear,' she said, 'you won't let me go away sorry, will you? and
I must go so soon. For my sake, when I wish it so!'
I went to Ormsby, and took his cold, passive hand. 'I do forgive him,
Marjory,' I said.
She smiled brightly at us both. 'And you won't forget, either of you?' she
said. 'And, Douglas, you will be brave, and take your own part now.
Good-bye, good-bye.'
I tried to reach her. 'Don't leave me; take me with you, Marjory--dear,
dear Marjory, don't go!' But there was only firelit space where she had
stood, though the sound of her pleading, pathetic voice was still in the air.
Ormsby remained for a few minutes leaning against a desk, with his face
buried in his arms, and I heard him struggling with his sobs. At last he
rose, and left the room without a word.
But I stayed there where I had last seen Marjory, till the fire died down,
and the hour was late, for I was glad to be alone with the new and
solemn joy that had come to me. For she had not forgotten me where she
was; I had been allowed to see her once more, and it might even be that

I should see her again. And I resolved then that when she came she
should find me more worthy of her.
*****
From that night my character seemed to enter upon a new phase, and
when I returned to school it was to begin my second term under better
auspices.
My cousins had welcomed me cordially among them, and as I mastered
the lesson of give and take, of respecting one's self in respecting others,
which I needed to learn, my early difficulties vanished with the weakness
that had produced them.
By Ormsby I was never again molested; in word and deed, he was true to
the promise exacted from him during that last strange scene. At first, he
avoided me as being too painfully connected with the past; but by
degrees, as he recognised that his secret was safe in my keeping, we
grew to understand one another better, although it would be too much to
say that we ever became intimate.
After he went to Sandhurst I lost sight of him, and only a few months
since the news of his death in the Soudan, where he fell gallantly, made
me sorrowfully aware that we should never meet again.
I had a lingering fancy that Marjory might appear to me once more, but I
have long since given up all hope of that in this life, and for what may
come after I am content to wait.
But the charge my child-friend had undertaken was completed on the
night she was allowed to return to earth and determine the crisis of two
lives; there is nothing now to call the bright and gracious little spirit back,
for her influence will remain always.

The Conscript
Honore de Balzac

[The inner self] ... by a phenomenon of vision or of locomotion has been
known at times to abolish Space in its two modes of Time and Distance-the one intellectual, the other physical.
--HISTORY OF LOUIS LAMBERT.

On a November evening in the year 1793 the principal citizens of
Carentan were assembled in Mme. de Dey's drawing-room. Mme. de Dey
held this _reception_ every night of the week, but an unwonted interest
attached to this evening's gathering, owing to certain circumstances
which would have passed altogether unnoticed in a great city, though in a
small country town they excited the greatest curiosity. For two days
before Mme. de Dey had not been at home to her visitors, and on the
previous evening her door had been shut, on the ground of indisposition.
Two such events at any ordinary time would have produced in Carentan
the same sensation that Paris knows on nights when there is no
performance at the theaters--existence is in some sort incomplete; but in
those times when the least indiscretion on the part of an aristocrat might
be a matter of life and death, this conduct of Mme. de Dey's was likely to
bring about the most disastrous consequences for her. Her position in
Carentan ought to be made clear, if the reader is to appreciate the
expression of keen curiosity and cunning fanaticism on the countenances
of these Norman citizens, and, what is of most importance, the part that
the lady played among them. Many a one during the days of the
Revolution has doubtless passed through a crisis as difficult as hers at
that moment, and the sympathies of more than one reader will fill in all
the coloring of the picture.
Mme. de Dey was the widow of a Lieutenant-General, a Knight of the
Orders of Saint Michael and of the Holy Ghost. She had left the Court
when the Emigration began, and taken refuge in the neighborhood of
Carentan, where she had large estates, hoping that the influence of the

 Reign of Terror would be but little felt there. Her calculations, based on a
thorough knowledge of the district, proved correct. The Revolution made
little disturbance in Lower Normandy. Formerly, when Mme. de Dey had
spent any time in the country, her circle of acquaintance had been
confined to the noble families of the district; but now, from politic
motives, she opened her house to the principal citizens and to the
Revolutionary authorities of the town, endeavoring to touch and gratify
their social pride without arousing either hatred or jealousy. Gracious and
kindly, possessed of the indescribable charm that wins good will without
loss of dignity or effort to pay court to any, she had succeeded in gaining
universal esteem; the discreet warnings of exquisite tact enabled her to
steer a difficult course among the exacting claims of this mixed society,
without wounding the overweening self-love of parvenus on the one hand,
or the susceptibilities of her old friends on the other.
She was about thirty-eight years of age, and still preserved, not the fresh,
high-colored beauty of the Basse-Normandes, but a fragile loveliness of
what may be called an aristocratic type. Her figure was lissome and
slender, her features delicate and clearly cut; the pale face seemed to
light up and live when she spoke; but there was a quiet and devout look
in the great dark eyes, for all their graciousness of expression--a look that
seemed to say that the springs of her life lay without her own existence.
In her early girlhood she had been married to an elderly and jealous
soldier. Her false position in the midst of a gay Court had doubtless done
something to bring a veil of sadness over a face that must once have
been bright with the charms of quick-pulsed life and love. She had been
compelled to set constant restraint upon her frank impulses and emotions
at an age when a woman feels rather than thinks, and the depths of
passion in her heart had never been stirred. In this lay the secret of her
greatest charm, a youthfulness of the inmost soul, betrayed at times by
her face, and a certain tinge of innocent wistfulness in her ideas. She was
reserved in her demeanor, but in her bearing and in the tones of her voice
there was still something that told of girlish longings directed toward a
vague future. Before very long the least susceptible fell in love with her,
and yet stood somewhat in awe of her dignity and high-bred manner. Her
great soul, strengthened by the cruel ordeals through which she had
passed, seemed to set her too far above the ordinary level, and these

 men weighed themselves, and instinctively felt that they were found
wanting. Such a nature demanded an exalted passion.
Moreover, Mme. de Dey's affections were concentrated in one sentiment-a mother's love for her son. All the happiness and joy that she had not
known as a wife, she had found later in her boundless love for him. The
coquetry of a mistress, the jealousy of a wife mingled with the pure and
deep affection of a mother. She was miserable when they were apart, and
nervous about him while he was away; she could never see enough of
him, and lived through and for him alone. Some idea of the strength of
this tie may be conveyed to the masculine understanding by adding that
this was not only Mme. de Dey's only son, but all she had of kith or kin in
the world, the one human being on earth bound to her by all the fears
and hopes and joys of her life.
The late Comte de Dey was the last of his race, and she, his wife, was the
sole heiress and descendant of her house. So worldly ambitions and
family considerations, as well as the noblest cravings of the soul,
combined to heighten in the Countess a sentiment that is strong in every
woman's heart. The child was all the dearer, because only with infinite
care had she succeeded in rearing him to man's estate; medical science
had predicted his death a score of times, but she had held fast to her
presentiments and her hopes, and had known the inexpressible joy of
watching him pass safely through the perils of infancy, of seeing his
constitution strengthen in spite of the decrees of the Faculty.
Thanks to her constant care, the boy had grown up and developed so
favorably, that at twenty years of age he was regarded as one of the
most accomplished gentlemen at the Court of Versailles. One final
happiness that does not always crown a mother's efforts was hers--her
son worshiped her; and between these two there was the deep sympathy
of kindred souls. If they had not been bound to each other already by a
natural and sacred tie, they would instinctively have felt for each other a
friendship that is rarely met with between two men.
At the age of eighteen, the young Count had received an appointment as
sub-lieutenant in a regiment of dragoons, and had made it a point of
honor to follow the emigrant Princes into exile.

 Then Mme. de Dey faced the dangers of her cruel position. She was rich,
noble, and the mother of an Emigrant. With the one desire to look after
her son's great fortune, she had denied herself the happiness of being
with him; and when she read the rigorous laws in virtue of which the
Republic was daily confiscating the property of Emigrants at Carentan,
she congratulated herself on the courageous course that she had taken.
Was she not keeping watch over the wealth of her son at the risk of her
life? Later, when news came of the horrible executions ordered by the
Convention, she slept, happy in the knowledge that her own treasure was
in safety, out of reach of peril, far from the scaffolds of the Revolution.
She loved to think that she had followed the best course, that she had
saved her darling and her darling's fortunes; and to this secret thought
she made such concessions as the misfortunes of the times demanded,
without compromising her dignity or her aristocratic tenets, and
enveloped her sorrows in reserve and mystery. She had foreseen the
difficulties that would beset her at Carentan. Did she not tempt the
scaffold by the very fact of going thither to take a prominent place? Yet,
sustained by a mother's courage, she succeeded in winning the affection
of the poor, ministering without distinction to everyone in trouble; and
made herself necessary to the well-to-do, by providing amusements for
them.
The procureur of the commune might be seen at her house, the mayor,
the president of the "district," and the public prosecutor, and even the
judges of the Revolutionary tribunals went there. The four first-named
gentlemen were none of them married, and each paid court to her, in the
hope that Mme. de Dey would take him for her husband, either from fear
of making an enemy or from a desire to find a protector.
The public prosecutor, once an attorney at Caen, and the Countess's man
of business, did what he could to inspire love by a system of devotion and
generosity, a dangerous game of cunning! He was the most formidable of
all her suitors. He alone knew the amount of the large fortune of his
sometime client, and his fervor was inevitably increased by the cupidity of
greed, and by the consciousness that he wielded an enormous power, the
power of life and death in the district. He was still a young man, and,
owing to the generosity of his behavior, Mme. de Dey was unable as yet

 to estimate him truly. But, in despite of the danger of matching herself
against Norman cunning, she used all the craft and inventiveness that
Nature has bestowed on women to play off the rival suitors one against
another. She hoped, by gaining time, to emerge safe and sound from her
difficulties at last; for at that time Royalists in the provinces flattered
themselves with a hope, daily renewed, that the morrow would see the
end of the Revolution--a conviction that proved fatal to many of them.
In spite of difficulties, the Countess had maintained her independence
with considerable skill until the day when, by an inexplicable want of
prudence, she took occasion to close her salon. So deep and sincere was
the interest that she inspired, that those who usually filled her drawingroom felt a lively anxiety when the news was spread; then, with the frank
curiosity characteristic of provincial manners, they went to inquire into
the misfortune, grief, or illness that had befallen Mme. de Dey.
To all these questions, Brigitte, the housekeeper, answered with the same
formula: her mistress was keeping her room, and would see no one, not
even her own servants. The almost claustral lives of dwellers in small
towns fosters a habit of analysis and conjectural explanation of the
business of everybody else; so strong is it, that when everyone had
exclaimed over poor Mme. de Dey (without knowing whether the lady was
overcome by joy or sorrow), each one began to inquire into the causes of
her sudden seclusion.
"If she were ill, she would have sent for the doctor," said gossip number
one; "now the doctor has been playing chess in my house all day. He said
to me, laughing, that in these days there is only one disease, and that,
unluckily, it is incurable."
The joke was hazarded discreetly. Women and men, elderly folk and
young girls, forthwith betook themselves to the vast fields of conjecture.
Everyone imagined that there was some secret in it, and every head was
busy with the secret. Next day the suspicions became malignant.
Everyone lives in public in a small town, and the women-kind were the
first to find out that Brigitte had laid in an extra stock of provisions. The
thing could not be disputed. Brigitte had been seen in the market-place
betimes that morning, and, wonderful to relate, she had bought the one

 hare to be had. The whole town knew that Mme. de Dey did not care for
game. The hare became a starting point for endless conjectures.
Elderly gentlemen, taking their constitutional, noticed a sort of
suppressed bustle in the Countess's house; the symptoms were the more
apparent because the servants were at evident pains to conceal them.
The man-servant was beating a carpet in the garden. Only yesterday no
one would have remarked the fact, but to-day everybody began to build
romances upon that harmless piece of household stuff. Everyone had a
version.
On the following day, that on which Mme. de Dey gave out that she was
not well, the magnates of Carentan went to spend the evening at the
mayor's brother's house. He was a retired merchant, a married man, a
strictly honorable soul; everyone respected him, and the Countess held
him in high regard. There all the rich widows' suitors were fain to invent
more or less probable fictions, each one thinking the while how to turn to
his own advantage the secret that compelled her to compromise herself in
such a manner.
The public prosecutor spun out a whole drama to bring Mme. de Dey's son
to her house of a night. The mayor had a belief in a priest who had
refused the oath, a refugee from La Vendee; but this left him not a little
embarrassed how to account for the purchase of a hare on a Friday. The
president of the district had strong leanings toward a Chouan chief, or a
Vendean leader hotly pursued. Others voted for a noble escaped from the
prisons of Paris. In short, one and all suspected that the Countess had
been guilty of some piece of generosity that the law of those days defined
as a crime, an offense that was like to bring her to the scaffold. The public
prosecutor, moreover, said, in a low voice, that they must hush the
matter up, and try to save the unfortunate lady from the abyss toward
which she was hastening.
"If you spread reports about," he added, "I shall be obliged to take
cognizance of the matter, and to search the house, and then!..."
He said no more, but everyone understood what was left unsaid.

 The Countess's real friends were so much alarmed for her, that on the
morning of the third day the _Procureur Syndic_ of the commune made
his wife write a few lines to persuade Mme. de Dey to hold her reception
as usual that evening. The old merchant took a bolder step. He called that
morning upon the lady. Strong in the thought of the service he meant to
do her, he insisted that he must see Mme. de Dey, and was amazed
beyond expression to find her out in the garden, busy gathering the last
autumn flowers in her borders to fill the vases.
"She has given refuge to her lover, no doubt," thought the old man,
struck with pity for the charming woman before him.
The Countess's face wore a strange look, that confirmed his suspicions.
Deeply moved by the devotion so natural to women, but that always
touches us, because all men are flattered by the sacrifices that any
woman makes for any one of them, the merchant told the Countess of the
gossip that was circulating in the town, and showed her the danger that
she was running. He wound up at last with saying that "if there are some
of our public functionaries who are sufficiently ready to pardon a piece of
heroism on your part so long as it is a priest that you wish to save, no
one will show you any mercy if it is discovered that you are sacrificing
yourself to the dictates of your heart."
At these words Mme. de Dey gazed at her visitor with a wild excitement in
her manner that made him tremble, old though he was.
"Come in," she said, taking him by the hand to bring him to her room,
and as soon as she had assured herself that they were alone, she drew a
soiled, torn letter from her bodice.--"Read it!" she cried, with a violent
effort to pronounce the words.
She dropped as if exhausted into her armchair. While the old merchant
looked for his spectacles and wiped them, she raised her eyes, and for the
first time looked at him with curiosity; then, in an uncertain voice, "I trust
in you," she said softly.
"Why did I come but to share in your crime?" the old merchant said
simply.

 She trembled. For the first time since she had come to the little town her
soul found sympathy in another soul. A sudden light dawned meantime on
the old merchant; he understood the Countess's joy and her prostration.
Her son had taken part in the Granville expedition; he wrote to his mother
from his prison, and the letter brought her a sad, sweet hope. Feeling no
doubts as to his means of escape, he wrote that within three days he was
sure to reach her, disguised. The same letter that brought these weighty
tidings was full of heartrending farewells in case the writer should not be
in Carentan by the evening of the third day, and he implored his mother
to send a considerable sum of money by the bearer, who had gone
through dangers innumerable to deliver it. The paper shook in the old
man's hands.
"And to-day is the third day!" cried Mme. de Dey. She sprang to her feet,
took back the letter, and walked up and down.
"You have set to work imprudently," the merchant remarked, addressing
her. "Why did you buy provisions?"
"Why, he may come in dying of hunger, worn out with fatigue, and--" She
broke off.
"I am sure of my brother," the old merchant went on; "I will engage him
in your interests."
The merchant in this crisis recovered his old business shrewdness, and
the advice that he gave Mme. de Dey was full of prudence and wisdom.
After the two had agreed together as to what they were to do and say,
the old merchant went on various ingenious pretexts to pay visits to the
principal houses of Carentan, announcing wherever he went that he had
just been to see Mme. de Dey, and that, in spite of her indisposition, she
would receive that evening. Matching his shrewdness against Norman wits
in the cross-examination he underwent in every family as to the
Countess's complaint, he succeeded in putting almost everyone who took
an interest in the mysterious affair upon the wrong scent.

 His very first call worked wonders. He told, in the hearing of a gouty old
lady, how that Mme. de Dey had all but died of an attack of gout in the
stomach; how that the illustrious Tronchin had recommended her in such
a case to put the skin from a live hare on her chest, to stop in bed, and
keep perfectly still. The Countess, he said, had lain in danger of her life
for the past two days; but after carefully following out Tronchin's singular
prescription, she was now sufficiently recovered to receive visitors that
evening.
This tale had an immense success in Carentan. The local doctor, a
Royalist _in petto_, added to its effect by gravely discussing the specific.
Suspicion, nevertheless, had taken too deep root in a few perverse or
philosophical minds to be entirely dissipated; so it fell out that those who
had the right of entry into Mme. de Dey's drawing-room hurried thither at
an early hour, some to watch her face, some out of friendship, but the
more part attracted by the fame of the marvelous cure.
They found the Countess seated in a corner of the great chimney-piece in
her room, which was almost as modestly furnished as similar apartments
in Carentan; for she had given up the enjoyment of luxuries to which she
had formerly been accustomed, for fear of offending the narrow
prejudices of her guests, and she had made no changes in her house. The
floor was not even polished. She had left the old somber hangings on the
walls, had kept the old-fashioned country furniture, burned tallow
candles, had fallen in with the ways of the place and adopted provincial
life without flinching before its cast-iron narrowness, its most
disagreeable hardships; but knowing that her guests would forgive her for
any prodigality that conduced to their comfort, she left nothing undone
where their personal enjoyment was concerned; her dinners, for instance,
were excellent. She even went so far as to affect avarice to recommend
herself to these sordid natures; and had the ingenuity to make it appear
that certain concessions to luxury had been made at the instance of
others, to whom she had graciously yielded.
Toward seven o'clock that evening, therefore, the nearest approach to
polite society that Carentan could boast was assembled in Mme. de Dey's
drawing-room, in a wide circle, about the fire. The old merchant's
sympathetic glances sustained the mistress of the house through this

 ordeal; with wonderful strength of mind, she underwent the curious
scrutiny of her guests, and bore with their trivial prosings. Every time
there was a knock at the door, at every sound of footsteps in the street,
she hid her agitation by raising questions of absorbing interest to the
countryside. She led the conversation on to the burning topic of the
quality of various ciders, and was so well seconded by her friend who
shared her secret, that her guests almost forgot to watch her, and her
face wore its wonted look; her self-possession was unshaken. The public
prosecutor and one of the judges of the Revolutionary Tribunal kept
silence, however; noting the slightest change that flickered over her
features, listening through the noisy talk to every sound in the house.
Several times they put awkward questions, which the Countess answered
with wonderful presence of mind. So brave is a mother's heart!
Mme. de Dey had drawn her visitors into little groups, had made parties
of whist, boston, or reversis, and sat talking with some of the young
people; she seemed to be living completely in the present moment, and
played her part like a consummate actress. She elicited a suggestion of
loto, and saying that no one else knew where to find the game, she left
the room.
"My good Brigitte, I cannot breathe down there!" she cried, brushing
away the tears that sprang to her eyes that glittered with fever, sorrow,
and impatience.--She had gone up to her son's room, and was looking
round it. "He does not come," she said. "Here I can breathe and live. A
few minutes more, and he will be here, for he is alive, I am sure that he
is alive! my heart tells me so. Do you hear nothing, Brigitte? Oh! I would
give the rest of my life to know whether he is still in prison or tramping
across the country. I would rather not think."
Once more she looked to see that everything was in order. A bright fire
blazed on the hearth, the shutters were carefully closed, the furniture
shone with cleanliness, the bed had been made after a fashion that
showed that Brigitte and the Countess had given their minds to every
trifling detail. It was impossible not to read her hopes in the dainty and
thoughtful preparations about the room; love and a mother's tenderest
caresses seemed to pervade the air in the scent of flowers. None but a
mother could have foreseen the requirements of a soldier and arranged

 so completely for their satisfaction. A dainty meal, the best of wine, clean
linen, slippers--no necessary, no comfort, was lacking for the weary
traveler, and all the delights of home heaped upon him should reveal his
mother's love.
"Oh, Brigitte!..." cried the Countess, with a heart-rending inflection in her
voice. She drew a chair to the table as if to strengthen her illusions and
realize her longings.
"Ah! madame, he is coming. He is not far off.... I haven't a doubt that he
is living and on his way," Brigitte answered. "I put a key in the Bible and
held it on my fingers while Cottin read the Gospel of St. John, and the key
did not turn, madame."
"Is that a certain sign?" the Countess asked.
"Why, yes, madame! everybody knows that. He is still alive; I would
stake my salvation on it; God cannot be mistaken."
"If only I could see him here in the house, in spite of the danger."
"Poor Monsieur Auguste!" cried Brigitte; "I expect he is tramping along
the lanes!"
"And that is eight o'clock striking now!" cried the Countess in terror.
She was afraid that she had been too long in the room where she felt sure
that her son was alive; all those preparations made for him meant that he
was alive. She went down, but she lingered a moment in the peristyle for
any sound that might waken the sleeping echoes of the town. She smiled
at Brigitte's husband, who was standing there on guard; the man's eyes
looked stupid with the strain of listening to the faint sounds of the night.
She stared into the darkness, seeing her son in every shadow
everywhere; but it was only for a moment. Then she went back to the
drawing-room with an assumption of high spirits, and began to play at
loto with the little girls. But from time to time she complained of feeling
unwell, and went to sit in her great chair by the fireside. So things went in
Mme. de Dey's house and in the minds of those beneath her roof.

 Meanwhile, on the road from Paris to Cherbourg, a young man, dressed in
the inevitable brown _carmagnole_ of those days, was plodding his way
toward Carentan. When the first levies were made, there was little or no
discipline kept up. The exigencies of the moment scarcely admitted of
soldiers being equipped at once, and it was no uncommon thing to see
the roads thronged with conscripts in their ordinary clothes. The young
fellows went ahead of their company to the next halting place, or lagged
behind it; it depended upon their fitness to bear the fatigues of a long
march. This particular wayfarer was some considerable way in advance of
a company of conscripts on the way to Cherbourg, whom the mayor was
expecting to arrive every hour, for it was his duty to distribute their
billets. The young man's footsteps were still firm as he trudged along, and
his bearing seemed to indicate that he was no stranger to the rough life of
a soldier. The moon shone on the pasture land about Carentan, but he
had noticed great masses of white cloud that were about to scatter
showers of snow over the country, and doubtless the fear of being
overtaken by a storm had quickened his pace in spite of his weariness.
The wallet on his back was almost empty, and he carried a stick in his
hand, cut from one of the high, thick box hedges that surround most of
the farms in Lower Normandy. As the solitary wayfarer came into
Carentan, the gleaming moonlit outlines of its towers stood out for a
moment with ghostly effect against the sky. He met no one in the silent
streets that rang with the echoes of his own footsteps, and was obliged to
ask the way to the mayor's house of a weaver who was working late. The
magistrate was not far to seek, and in a few minutes the conscript was
sitting on a stone bench in the mayor's porch waiting for his billet. He was
sent for, however, and confronted with that functionary, who scrutinized
him closely. The foot soldier was a good-looking young man, who
appeared to be of gentle birth. There was something aristocratic in his
bearing, and signs in his face of intelligence developed by a good
education.
"What is your name?" asked the mayor, eying him shrewdly.
"Julien Jussieu," answered the conscript.

 "From--?" queried the official, and an incredulous smile stole over his
features.
"From Paris."
"Your comrades must be a good way behind?" remarked the Norman in
sarcastic tones.
"I am three leagues ahead of the battalion."
"Some sentiment attracts you to Carentan, of course, citizen-conscript,"
said the mayor astutely. "All right, all right!" he added, with a wave of the
hand, seeing that the young man was about to speak. "We know where to
send you. There, off with you, _Citizen Jussieu_," and he handed over the
billet.
There was a tinge of irony in the stress the magistrate laid on the two last
words while he held out a billet on Mme. de Dey. The conscript read the
direction curiously.
"He knows quite well that he has not far to go, and when he gets outside
he will very soon cross the marketplace," said the mayor to himself, as
the other went out. "He is uncommonly bold! God guide him!... He has an
answer ready for everything. Yes, but if somebody else had asked to see
his papers it would have been all up with him!"
The clocks in Carentan struck half-past nine as he spoke. Lanterns were
being lit in Mme. de Dey's antechamber, servants were helping their
masters and mistresses into sabots, greatcoats, and calashes. The card
players settled their accounts, and everybody went out together, after the
fashion of all little country towns.
"It looks as if the prosecutor meant to stop," said a lady, who noticed that
that important personage was not in the group in the market-place,
where they all took leave of one another before going their separate ways
home. And, as a matter of fact, that redoubtable functionary was alone
with the Countess, who waited trembling till he should go. There was
something appalling in their long silence.

 "Citoyenne," said he at last, "I am here to see that the laws of the
Republic are carried out--"
Mme. de Dey shuddered.
"Have you nothing to tell me?"
"Nothing!" she answered, in amazement.
"Ah! madame," cried the prosecutor, sitting down beside her and
changing his tone. "At this moment, for lack of a word, one of us--you or
I--may carry our heads to the scaffold. I have watched your character,
your soul, your manner, too closely to share the error into which you
have managed to lead your visitors to-night. You are expecting your son,
I could not doubt it."
The Countess made an involuntary sign of denial, but her face had grown
white and drawn with the struggle to maintain the composure that she did
not feel, and no tremor was lost on the merciless prosecutor.
"Very well," the Revolutionary official went on, "receive him; but do not
let him stay under your roof after seven o'clock to-morrow morning; for
to-morrow, as soon as it is light, I shall come with a denunciation that I
will have made out, and--"
She looked at him, and the dull misery in her eyes would have softened a
tiger.
"I will make it clear that the denunciation was false by making a thorough
search," he went on in a gentle voice; "my report shall be such that you
will be safe from any subsequent suspicion. I shall make mention of your
patriotic gifts, your civism, and _all_ of us will be safe."
Mme. de Dey, fearful of a trap, sat motionless, her face afire, her tongue
frozen. A knock at the door rang through the house.

 "Oh!..." cried the terrified mother, falling upon her knees; "save him!
save him!"
"Yes, let us save him!" returned the public prosecutor, and his eyes grew
bright as he looked at her, "if it costs _us_ our lives!"
"Lost!" she wailed. The prosecutor raised her politely.
"Madame," said he with a flourish of eloquence, "to your own free will
alone would I owe--"
"Madame, he is--" cried Brigitte, thinking that her mistress was alone. At
the sight of the public prosecutor, the old servant's joy-flushed
countenance became haggard and impassive.
"Who is it, Brigitte?" the prosecutor asked kindly, as if he too were in the
secret of the household.
"A conscript that the mayor has sent here for a night's lodging," the
woman replied, holding out the billet.
"So it is," said the prosecutor, when he had read the slip of paper. "A
battalion is coming here to-night."
And he went.
The Countess's need to believe in the faith of her sometime attorney was
so great, that she dared not entertain any suspicion of him. She fled
upstairs; she felt scarcely strength enough to stand; she opened the door,
and sprang, half dead with fear, into her son's arms.
"Oh! my child! my child!" she sobbed, covering him with almost frenzied
kisses.
"Madame!..." said a stranger's voice.
"Oh! it is not he!" she cried, shrinking away in terror, and she stood face
to face with the conscript, gazing at him with haggard eyes.

 "_O saint bon Dieu!_ how like he is!" cried Brigitte.
There was silence for a moment; even the stranger trembled at the sight
of Mme. de Dey's face.
"Ah! monsieur," she said, leaning on the arm of Brigitte's husband, feeling
for the first time the full extent of a sorrow that had all but killed her at
its first threatening; "ah! monsieur, I cannot stay to see you any longer
... permit my servants to supply my place, and to see that you have all
that you want."
She went down to her own room, Brigitte and the old serving-man half
carrying her between them. The housekeeper set her mistress in a chair,
and broke out:
"What, madame! is that man to sleep in Monsieur Auguste's bed, and
wear Monsieur Auguste's slippers, and eat the pasty that I made for
Monsieur Auguste? Why, if they were to guillotine me for it, I--"
"Brigitte!" cried Mme. de Dey.
Brigitte said no more.
"Hold your tongue, chatterbox," said her husband, in a low voice; "do you
want to kill madame?"
A sound came from the conscript's room as he drew his chair to the table.
"I shall not stay here," cried Mme. de Dey; "I shall go into the
conservatory; I shall hear better there if anyone passes in the night."
She still wavered between the fear that she had lost her son and the hope
of seeing him once more. That night was hideously silent. Once, for the
Countess, there was an awful interval, when the battalion of conscripts
entered the town, and the men went by, one by one, to their lodgings.
Every footfall, every sound in the street, raised hopes to be disappointed;
but it was not for long, the dreadful quiet succeeded again. Toward

 morning the Countess was forced to return to her room. Brigitte, ever
keeping watch over her mistress's movements, did not see her come out
again; and when she went, she found the Countess lying there dead.
"I expect she heard that conscript," cried Brigitte, "walking about
Monsieur Auguste's room, whistling that accursed _Marseillaise_ of theirs
while he dressed, as if he had been in a stable! That must have killed
her."
But it was a deeper and a more solemn emotion, and doubtless some
dreadful vision, that had caused Mme. de Dey's death; for at the very
hour when she died at Carentan, her son was shot in le Morbihan.
*****
This tragical story may be added to all the instances on record of the
workings of sympathies uncontrolled by the laws of time and space. These
observations, collected with scientific curiosity by a few isolated
individuals, will one day serve as documents on which to base the
foundations of a new science which hitherto has lacked its man of genius.

 
The Devils Heir
Honore de Balzac

There once was a good old canon of Notre Dame de Paris, who lived in a
fine house of his own, near St. Pierre-aux-Boeufs, in the Parvis. This
canon had come a simple priest to Paris, naked as a dagger without its
sheath. But since he was found to be a handsome man, well furnished
with everything, and so well constituted, that if necessary he was able to
do the work of many, without doing himself much harm, he gave himself
up earnestly to the confessing of ladies, giving to the melancholy a gentle
absolution, to the sick a drachm of his balm, to all some little dainty. He
was so well known for his discretion, his benevolence, and other
ecclesiastical qualities, that he had customers at Court. Then in order not
to awaken the jealousy of the officials, that of the husbands and others,
in short, to endow with sanctity these good and profitable practices, the
Lady Desquerdes gave him a bone of St. Victor, by virtue of which all the
miracles were performed. And to the curious it was said, "He has a bone
which will cure everything;" and to this, no one found anything to reply,
because it was not seemly to suspect relics. Beneath the shade of his
cassock, the good priest had the best of reputations, that of a man valiant
under arms. So he lived like a king. He made money with holy water;
sprinkled it and transmitted the holy water into good wine. More than
that, his name lay snugly in all the et ceteras of the notaries, in wills or in
caudicils, which certain people have falsely written CODICIL, seeing that
the word is derived from cauda, as if to say the tail of the legacy. In fact,
the good old Long Skirts would have been made an archbishop if he had
only said in joke, "I should like to put on a mitre for a handkerchief in
order to have my head warmer." Of all the benefices offered to him, he
chose only a simple canon's stall to keep the good profits of the
confessional. But one day the courageous canon found himself weak in
the back, seeing that he was all sixty- eight years old, and had held many
confessionals. Then thinking over all his good works, he thought it about
time to cease his apostolic labours, the more so, as he possessed about
one hundred thousand crowns earned by the sweat of his body. From that
day he only confessed ladies of high lineage, and did it very well. So that
it was said at Court that in spite of the efforts of the best young clerks

 there was still no one but the Canon of St. Pierre-aux-Boeufs to properly
bleach the soul of a lady of condition. Then at length the canon became
by force of nature a fine nonagenarian, snowy about the head, with
trembling hands, but square as a tower, having spat so much without
coughing, that he coughed now without being able to spit; no longer
rising from his chair, he who had so often risen for humanity; but drinking
dry, eating heartily, saying nothing, but having all the appearance of a
living Canon of Notre Dame. Seeing the immobility of the aforesaid
canon; seeing the stories of his evil life which for some time had
circulated among the common people, always ignorant; seeing his dumb
seclusion, his flourishing health, his young old age, and other things too
numerous to mention--there were certain people who to do the
marvellous and injure our holy religion, went about saying that the true
canon was long since dead, and that for more than fifty years the devil
had taken possession of the old priest's body. In fact, it seemed to his
former customers that the devil could only by his great heat have
furnished these hermetic distillations, that they remembered to have
obtained on demand from this good confessor, who always had le diable
au corps. But as this devil had been undoubtedly cooked and ruined by
them, and that for a queen of twenty years he would not have moved,
well-disposed people and those not wanting in sense, or the citizens who
argued about everything, people who found lice in bald heads, demanded
why the devil rested under the form of a canon, went to the Church of
Notre Dame at the hours when the canons usually go, and ventured so far
as to sniff the perfume of the incense, taste the holy water, and a
thousand other things. To these heretical propositions some said that
doubtless the devil wished to convert himself, and others that he
remained in the shape of the canon to mock at the three nephews and
heirs of this said brave confessor and make them wait until the day of
their own death for the ample succession of this uncle, to whom they paid
great attention every day, going to look if the good man had his eyes
open, and in fact found him always with his eye clear, bright, and piercing
as the eye of a basilisk, which pleased them greatly, since they loved
their uncle very much--in words. On this subject an old woman related
that for certain the canon was the devil, because his two nephews, the
procureur and the captain, conducting their uncle at night, without a
lamp, or lantern, returning from a supper at the penitentiary's, had
caused him by accident to tumble over a heap of stones gathered

 together to raise the statue of St. Christopher. At first the old man had
struck fire in falling, but was, amid the cries of his dear nephews and by
the light of the torches they came to seek at her house found standing up
as straight as a skittle and as gay as a weaving whirl, exclaiming that the
good wine of the penitentiary had given him the courage to sustain this
shock and that his bones were exceedingly hard and had sustained rude
assaults. The good nephews believing him dead, were much astonished,
and perceived that the day that was to dispatch their uncle was a long
way off, seeing that at the business stones were of no use. So that they
did not falsely call him their good uncle, seeing that he was of good
quality. Certain scandalmongers said that the canon found so many
stones in his path that he stayed at home not to be ill with the stone, and
the fear of worse was the cause of his seclusion.
Of all these sayings and rumours, it remains that the old canon, devil or
not, kept his house, and refused to die, and had three heirs with whom he
lived as with his sciaticas, lumbagos, and other appendage of human life.
Of the said three heirs, one was the wickedest soldier ever born of a
woman, and he must have considerably hurt her in breaking his egg,
since he was born with teeth and bristles. So that he ate, two-fold, for the
present and the future, keeping wenches whose cost he paid; inheriting
from his uncle the continuance, strength, and good use of that which is
often of service. In great battles, he endeavoured always to give blows
without receiving them, which is, and always will be, the only problem to
solve in war, but he never spared himself there, and, in fact, as he had no
other virtue except his bravery, he was captain of a company of lancers,
and much esteemed by the Duke of Burgoyne, who never troubled what
his soldiers did elsewhere. This nephew of the devil was named Captain
Cochegrue; and his creditors, the blockheads, citizens, and others, whose
pockets he slit, called him the Mau-cinge, since he was as mischievous as
strong; but he had moreover his back spoilt by the natural infirmity of a
hump, and it would have been unwise to attempt to mount thereon to get
a good view, for he would incontestably have run you through.
The second had studied the laws, and through the favour of his uncle had
become a procureur, and practised at the palace, where he did the
business of the ladies, whom formerly the canon had the best confessed.
This one was called Pille-grue, to banter him upon his real name, which

 was Cochegrue, like that of his brother the captain. Pille-grue had a lean
body, seemed to throw off very cold water, was pale of face, and
possessed a physiognomy like a polecat.
This notwithstanding, he was worth many a penny more than the captain,
and had for his uncle a little affection, but since about two years his heart
had cracked a little, and drop by drop his gratitude had run out, in such a
way that from time to time, when the air was damp, he liked to put his
feet into his uncle's hose, and press in advance the juice of this good
inheritance. He and his brother, the soldier found their share very small,
since loyally, in law, in fact, in justice, in nature, and in reality, it was
necessary to give the third part of everything to a poor cousin, son of
another sister of the canon, the which heir, but little loved by the good
man, remained in the country, where he was a shepherd, near
Nanterre.__
The guardian of beasts, an ordinary peasant, came to town by the advice
of his two cousins, who placed him in their uncle's house, in the hope
that, as much by his silly tricks and his clumsiness, his want of brain, and
his ignorance, he would be displeasing to the canon, who would kick him
out of his will. Now this poor Chiquon, as the shepherd was named, had
lived about a month alone with his old uncle, and finding more profit or
more amusement in minding an abbot than looking after sheep, made
himself the canon's dog, his servant, the staff of his old age, saying, "God
keep you," when he passed wind, "God save you," when he sneezed, and
"God guard you," when he belched; going to see if it rained, where the
cat was, remaining silent, listening, speaking, receiving the coughs of the
old man in his face, admiring him as the finest canon there ever was in
the world, all heartily and in good faith, knowing that he was licking him
after the manner of animals who clean their young ones; and the uncle,
who stood in no need of learning which side the bread was buttered,
repulsed poor Chiquon, making him turn about like a die, always calling
him Chiquon, and always saying to his other nephews that this Chiquon
was helping to kill him, such a numskull was he. Thereupon, hearing this,
Chiquon determined to do well by his uncle, and puzzled his
understanding to appear better; but as he had a behind shaped like a pair
of pumpkins, was broad shouldered, large limbed, and far from sharp, he
more resembled old Silenus than a gentle Zephyr. In fact, the poor

 shepherd, a simple man, could not reform himself, so he remained big
and fat, awaiting his inheritance to make himself thin.
One evening the canon began discoursing concerning the the devil and
the grave agonies, penances, tortures, etc., which God will get warm for
the accursed, and the good Chiquon hearing it, began to open his eyes as
wide as the door of an oven, at the statement, without believing a word of
it.
"What," said the canon, "are you not a Christian?"
"In that, yes," answered Chiquon.
"Well, there is a paradise for the good; is it not necessary to have a hell
for the wicked?"
"Yes, Mr. Canon; but the devil's of no use. If you had here a wicked man
who turned everything upside down; would you not kick him out of
doors?"
"Yes, Chiquon."
"Oh, well, mine uncle; God would be very stupid to leave in the this
world, which he has so curiously constructed, an abominable devil whose
special business it is to spoil everything for him. Pish! I recognise no devil
if there be a good God; you may depend upon that. I should very much
like to see the devil. Ha, ha! I am not afraid of his claws!"
"And if I were of your opinion I should have no care of my very youthful
years in which I held confessions at least ten times a day."
"Confess again, Mr. Canon. I assure you that will be a precious merit on
high."
"There, there! Do you mean it?"
"Yes, Mr. Canon."

 "Thou dost not tremble, Chiquon, to deny the devil?"
"I trouble no more about it than a sheaf of corn."
"The doctrine will bring misfortune upon you."
"By no means. God will defend me from the devil because I believe him
more learned and less stupid than the savans make him out."
Thereupon the two other nephews entered, and perceiving from the voice
of the canon that he did not dislike Chiquon very much, and that the
jeremiads which he had made concerning him were simple tricks to
disguise the affection which he bore him, looked at each other in great
astonishment.
Then, seeing their uncle laughing, they said to him-"If you will make a will, to whom will you leave the house?
"To Chiquon."
"And the quit rent of the Rue St. Denys?"
"To Chiquon."
"And the fief of Ville Parisis?"
"To Chiquon."
"But," said the captain, with his big voice, "everything then will be
Chiquon's."
"No," replied the canon, smiling, "because I shall have made my will in
proper form, the inheritance will be to the sharpest of you three; I am so
near to the future, that I can therein see clearly your destinies."
And the wily canon cast upon Chiquon a glance full of malice, like a decoy
bird would have thrown upon a little one to draw him into her net. The

 fire of his flaming eye enlightened the shepherd, who from that moment
had his understanding and his ears all unfogged, and his brain open, like
that of a maiden the day after her marriage. The procureur and the
captain, taking these sayings for gospel prophecies, made their bow and
went out from the house, quite perplexed at the absurd designs of the
canon.
"What do you think of Chiquon?" said Pille-grue to Mau-cinge.
"I think, I think," said the soldier, growling, "that I think of hiding myself
in the Rue d'Hierusalem, to put his head below his feet; he can pick it up
again if he likes."
"Oh, oh!" said the procureur, "you have a way of wounding that is easily
recognised, and people would say 'It's Cochegrue.' As for me, I thought to
invite him to dinner, after which, we would play at putting ourselves in a
sack in order to see, as they do at Court, who could walk best thus
attired. Then having sewn him up, we could throw him into the Seine, at
the same time begging him to swim."
"This must be well matured," replied the soldier.
"Oh! it's quite ripe," said the advocate. "The cousin gone to the devil, the
heritage would then be between us two."
"I'm quite agreeable," said the fighter, "but we must stick as close
together as the two legs of the same body, for if you are fine as silk, I as
strong as steel, and daggers are always as good as traps-- you hear that,
my good brother."
"Yes," said the advocate, "the cause is heard--now shall it be the thread
or the iron?"
"Eh? ventre de Dieu! is it then a king that we are going to settle? For a
simple numskull of a shepherd are so many words necessary? Come!
20,000 francs out of the Heritage to the one of us who shall first cut him
off: I'll say to him in good faith, 'Pick up your head.'"

 "And I, 'Swim my friend,'" cried the advocate, laughing like the gap of a
pourpoint.
And then they went to supper, the captain to his wench, and the advocate
to the house of a jeweller's wife, of whom he was the lover.
Who was astonished? Chiquon! The poor shepherd heard the planning of
his death, although the two cousins had walked in the parvis, and talked
to each other as every one speaks at church when praying to God. So
that Chiquon was much coupled to know if the words had come up or if
his ears had gone down.
"Do you hear, Mister Canon?"
"Yes," said he, "I hear the wood crackling in the fire."
"Ho, ho!" replied Chiquon, "if I don't believe in the devil, I believe in St.
Michael, my guardian angel; I go there where he calls me."
"Go, my child," said the canon, "and take care not to wet yourself, nor to
get your head knocked off, for I think I hear more rain, and the beggars
in the street are not always the most dangerous beggars."
At these words Chiquon was much astonished, and stared at the canon;
found his manner gay, his eye sharp, and his feet crooked; but as he had
to arrange matters concerning the death which menaced him, he thought
to himself that he would always have leisure to admire the canon, or to
cut his nails, and he trotted off quickly through the town, as a little
woman trots towards her pleasure.
His two cousins having no presumption of the divinatory science, of which
shepherds have had many passing attacks, had often talked before him of
their secret goings on, counting him as nothing.
Now one evening, to amuse the canon, Pille-grue had recounted to him
how had fallen in love with him a wife of a jeweller on whose head he had
adjusted certain carved, burnished, sculptured, historical horns, fit for the
brow of a prince. The good lady was to hear him, a right merry wench,

 quick at opportunities, giving an embrace while her husband was
mounting the stairs, devouring the commodity as if she was swallowing a
a strawberry, only thinking of love-making, always trifling and frisky, gay
as an honest woman who lacks nothing, contenting her husband, who
cherished her so much as he loved his own gullet; subtle as a perfume, so
much so, that for five years she managed so well with his household
affairs, and her own love affairs, that she had the reputation of a prudent
woman, the confidence of her husband, the keys of the house, the purse,
and all.
"And when do you play upon this gentle flute?" said the canon.
"Every evening and sometimes I stay all the night."
"But how?" said the canon, astonished.
"This is how. There is a room close to, a chest into which I get. When the
good husband returns from his friend the draper's, where he goes to
supper every evening, because often he helps the draper's wife in her
work, my mistress pleads a slight illness, lets him go to bed alone, and
comes to doctor her malady in the room where the chest is. On the
morrow, when my jeweller is at his forge, I depart, and as the house has
one exit on to the bridge, and another into the street, I always come to
the door when the husband is not, on the pretext of speaking to him of
his suits, which commence joyfully and heartily, and I never let them
come to an end. It is an income from cuckoldom, seeing that in the minor
expenses and loyal costs of the proceedings, he spends as much as on
the horses in his stable. He loves me well, as all good cuckolds should
love the man who aids them, to plant, cultivate, water and dig the natural
garden of Venus, and he does nothing without me."__
Now these practices came back again to the memory of the shepherd,
who was illuminated by the light issuing from his danger, and counselled
by the intelligence of those measures of self-preservation, of which every
animal possesses a sufficient dose to go to the end of his ball of life. So
Chiquon gained with hasty feet the Rue de la Calandre, where the jeweller
should be supping with his companion, and after having knocked at the
door, replied to question put to him through the little grill, that he was a

 messenger on state secrets, and was admitted to the draper's house. Now
coming straight to the fact, he made the happy jeweller get up from his
table, led him to a corner, and said to him: "If one of your neighbours had
planted a horn on your forehead and he was delivered to you, bound hand
and foot, would you throw him into the river?"
"Rather," said the jeweller, "but if you are mocking me I'll give you a
good drubbing."
"There, there!" replied Chiquon, "I am one of your friends and come to
warn you that as many times as you have conversed with the draper's
wife here, as often has your own wife been served the same way by the
advocate Pille-grue, and if you will come back to your forge, you will find
a good fire there. On your arrival, he who looks after your you- knowwhat, to keep it in good order, gets into the big clothes chest. Now make
a pretence that I have bought the said chest of you, and I will be upon
the bridge with a cart, waiting your orders."
The said jeweller took his cloak and his hat, and parted company with his
crony without saying a word, and ran to his hole like a poisoned rat. He
arrives and knocks, the door is opened, he runs hastily up the stairs, finds
two covers laid, sees his wife coming out of the chamber of love, and then
says to her, "My dear, here are two covers laid."
"Well, my darling are we not two?"
"No," said he, "we are three."
"Is your friend coming?" said she, looking towards the stairs with perfect
innocence.
"No, I speak of the friend who is in the chest."
"What chest?" said she. "Are you in your sound senses? Where do you see
a chest? Is the usual to put friends in chests? Am I a woman to keep
chests full of friends? How long have friends been kept in chests? Are you
come home mad to mix up your friends with your chests? I know no other

 friend then Master Cornille the draper, and no other chest than the one
with our clothes in."
"Oh!," said the jeweller, "my good woman, there is a bad young man,
who has come to warn me that you allow yourself to be embraced by our
advocate, and that he is in the chest."
"I!" said she, "I would not put up with his knavery, he does everything
the wrong way."
"There, there, my dear," replied the jeweller, "I know you to be a good
woman, and won't have a squabble with you about this paltry chest. The
giver of the warning is a box-maker, to whom I am about to sell this
cursed chest that I wish never again to see in my house, and for this one
he will sell me two pretty little ones, in which there will not be space
enough even for a child; thus the scandal and the babble of those envious
of your virtue will be extinguished for want of nourishment."
"You give me great pleasure," said she; "I don't attach any value to my
chest, and by chance there is nothing in it. Our linen is at the wash. It will
be easy to have the mischievous chest taken away tomorrow morning.
Will you sup?"
"Not at all," said he, "I shall sup with a better appetite without the chest."
"I see," said she, "that you won't easily get the chest out of your head."
"Halloa, there!" said the jeweller to his smiths and apprentices; "come
down!"
In the twinkling of an eye his people were before him. Then he, their
master, having briefly ordered the handling of the said chest, this piece of
furniture dedicated to love was tumbled across the room, but in passing
the advocate, finding his feet in the air to the which he was not
accustomed, tumbled over a little.
"Go on," said the wife, "go on, it's the lid shaking."

 "No, my dear, it's the bolt."
And without any other opposition the chest slid gently down the stairs.
"Ho there, carrier!" said the jeweller, and Chiquon came whistling his
mules, and the good apprentices lifted the litigious chest into the cart.
"Hi, hi!" said the advocate.
"Master, the chest is speaking," said an apprentice.
"In what language?" said the jeweller, giving him a good kick between
two features that luckily were not made of glass. The apprentice tumbled
over on to a stair in a way that induced him to discontinue his studies in
the language of chests. The shepherd, accompanied by the good jeweller,
carried all the baggage to the water-side without listening to the high
eloquence of the speaking wood, and having tied several stones to it, the
jeweller threw it into the Seine.
"Swim, my friend," cried the shepherd, in a voice sufficiently jeering at
the moment when the chest turned over, giving a pretty little plunge like
a duck.
Then Chiqoun continued to proceed along the quay, as far as the Rue- duport, St Laudry, near the cloisters of Notre Dame. There he noticed a
house, recognised the door, and knocked loudly.
"Open," said he, "open by order of the king."
Hearing this an old man who was no other than the famous Lombard,
Versoris, ran to the door.
"What is it?" said he.
"I am sent by the provost to warn you to keep good watch tonight,"
replied Chiquon, "as for his own part he will keep his archers ready. The
hunchback who has robbed you has come back again. Keep under arms,
for he is quite capable of easing you of the rest."

 Having said this, the good shepherd took to his heels and ran to the Rue
des Marmouzets, to the house where Captain Cochegrue was feasting
with La Pasquerette, the prettiest of town-girls, and the most charming in
perversity that ever was; according to all the gay ladies, her glance was
sharp and piercing as the stab of a dagger. Her appearance was so
tickling to the sight, that it would have put all Paradise to rout. Besides
which she was as bold as a woman who has no other virtue than her
insolence. Poor Chiquon was greatly embarrassed while going to the
quarter of the Marmouzets. He was greatly afraid that he would be unable
to find the house of La Pasquerette, or find the two pigeons gone to roost,
but a good angel arranged there speedily to his satisfaction. This is how.
On entering the Rue des Marmouzets he saw several lights at the
windows and night-capped heads thrust out, and good wenches, gay girls,
housewives, husbands, and young ladies, all of them are just out of bed,
looking at each other as if a robber were being led to execution by
torchlight.
"What's the matter?" said the shepherd to a citizen who in great haste
had rushed to the door with a chamber utensil in his hand.
"Oh! it's nothing," replied the good man. "We thought it was the
Armagnacs descending upon the town, but it's only Mau-cinge beating La
Pasquerette."
"Where?" asked the shepherd.
"Below there, at that fine house where the pillars have the mouths of
flying frogs delicately carved upon them. Do you hear the varlets and the
serving maids?"
And in fact there was nothing but cries of "Murder! Help! Come some
one!" and in the house blows raining down and the Mau-cinge said with
his gruff voice:
"Death to the wench! Ah, you sing out now, do you? Ah, you want your
money now, do you? Take that--"

 And La Pasquerette was groaning, "Oh! oh! I die! Help! Help! Oh! oh!"
Then came the blow of a sword and the heavy fall of a light body of the
fair girl sounded, and was followed by a great silence, after which the
lights were put out, servants, waiting women, roysterers, and others went
in again, and the shepherd who had come opportunely mounted the stairs
in company with them, but on beholding in the room above broken
glasses, slit carpets, and the cloth on the floor with the dishes, everyone
remained at a distance.
The shepherd, bold as a man with but one end in view, opened the door
of the handsome chamber where slept La Pasquerette, and found her
quite exhausted, her hair dishevelled, and her neck twisted, lying upon a
bloody carpet, and Mau-cinge frightened, with his tone considerably
lower, and not knowing upon what note to sing the remainder of his
anthem.
"Come, my little Pasquerette, don't pretend to be dead. Come, let me put
you tidy. Ah! little minx, dead or alive, you look so pretty in your blood
I'm going to kiss you." Having said which the cunning soldier took her and
threw her upon the bed, but she fell there all of a heap, and stiff as the
body of a man that had been hanged. Seeing which her companion found
it was time for his hump to retire from the game; however, the artful
fellow before slinking away said, "Poor Pasquerette, how could I murder
so good of girl, and one I loved so much? But, yes, I have killed her, the
thing is clear, for in her life never did her sweet breast hang down like
that. Good God, one would say it was a crown at the bottom of a wallet.
Thereupon Pasquerette opened her eyes and then bent her head slightly
to look at her flesh, which was white and firm, and she brought herself to
life by a box on the ears, administered to the captain.
"That will teach you to beware of the dead," said she, smiling.
"And why did he kill you, my cousin?" asked the shepherd.
"Why? Tomorrow the bailiffs seize everything that's here, and he who has
no more money than virtue, reproached me because I wished to be
agreeable to a handsome gentlemen, who would save me from the hands
of justice.

 "Pasquerette, I'll break every bone in your skin."
"There, there!" said Chiquon, whom the Mau-cinge had just recognised,
"is that all? Oh, well, my good friend, I bring you a large sum."
"Where from?" asked the captain, astonished.
"Come here, and let me whisper in your ear--if 30,000 crowns were
walking about at night under the shadow of a pear-tree, would you not
stoop down to pluck them, to prevent them spoiling?"
"Chiquon, I'll kill you like a dog if you are making game of me, or I will
kiss you there where you like it, if you will put me opposite 30,000
crowns, even when it shall be necessary to kill three citizens at the corner
of the Quay."
"You will not even kill one. This is how the matter stands. I have for a
sweetheart in all loyalty, the servant of the Lombard who is in the city
near the house of our good uncle. Now I have just learned on sound
information that this dear man has departed this morning into the country
after having hidden under a pear-tree in his garden a good bushel of gold,
believing himself to be seen only by the angels. But the girl who had by
chance a bad toothache, and was taking the air at her garret window,
spied the old crookshanks, without wishing to do so, and chattered of it to
me in fondness. If you will swear to give me a good share I will lend you
my shoulders in order that you may climb on to the top of the wall and
from there throw yourself into the pear-tree, which is against the wall.
There, now do you say that I am a blockhead, an animal?"
"No, you are a right loyal cousin, an honest man, and if you have ever to
put an enemy out off the way, I am there, ready to kill even one of my
own friends for you. I am no longer your cousin, but your brother. Ho
there! sweetheart," cried Mau-cinge to La Pasquerette, "put the tables
straight, wipe up your blood, it belongs to me, and I'll pay you for it by
giving you a hundred times as much of mine as I have taken of thine.
Make the best of it, shake the black dog, off your back, adjust your
petticoats, laugh, I wish it, look to the stew, and let us recommence our

 evening prayer where we left it off. Tomorrow I'll make thee braver than
a queen. This is my cousin whom I wish to entertain, even when to do so
it were necessary to turn the house out of windows. We shall get back
everything tomorrow in the cellars. Come, fall to!"
Thus, and in less time than it takes a priest to say his Dominus vobiscum,
the whole rookery passed from tears to laughter as it had previously from
laughter to tears. It is only in these houses of ill- fame that love is made
with the blow of a dagger, and where tempests of joy rage between four
walls. But these are things ladies of the high-neck dress do not
understand.
The said captain Cochegrue was gay as a hundred schoolboys at the
breaking up of class, and made his good cousin drink deeply, who spilled
everything country fashion, and pretended to be drunk, spluttering out a
hundred stupidities, as, that "tomorrow he would buy Paris, would lend a
hundred thousand crowns to the king, that he would be able to roll in
gold;" in fact, talked so much nonsense that the captain, fearing some
compromising avowal and thinking his brain quite muddled enough, led
him outside with the good intention, instead of sharing with him, of
ripping Chiquon open to see if he had not a sponge in his stomach,
because he had just soaked in a big quart of the good wine of Suresne.
They went along, disputing about a thousand theological subjects which
got very much mixed up, and finished by rolling quietly up against the
garden where were the crowns of the Lombard. Then Cochegrue, making
a ladder of Chiquon's broad shoulders, jumped on to the pear-tree like a
man expert in attacks upon towns, but Versoris, who was watching him,
made a blow at his neck, and repeated it so vigorously that with three
blows fell the upper portion of the said Cochegrue, but not until he had
heard the clear voice of the shepherd, who cried to him, "Pick up your
head, my friend." Thereupon the generous Chiquon, in whom virtue
received its recompense, thought it would be wise to return to the house
of the good canon, whose heritage was by the grace of God considerably
simplified. Thus he gained the Rue St. Pierre-Aux-Boeufs with all speed,
and soon slept like a new-born baby, no longer knowing the meaning of
the word "cousin-german." Now, on the morrow he rose according to the
habit of shepherds, with the sun, and came into his uncle's room to
inquire if he spat white, if he coughed, if he had slept well; but the old

 servant told him that the canon, hearing the bells of St Maurice, the first
patron of Notre Dame, ring for matins, he had gone out of reverence to
the cathedral, where all the Chapter were to breakfast with the Bishop of
Paris; upon which Chiquon replied: "Is his reverence the canon out of his
senses thus to disport himself, to catch a cold, to get rheumatism? Does
he wish to die? I'll light a big fire to warm him when he returns;" and the
good shepherd ran into the room where the canon generally sat, and to
his great astonishment beheld him seated in his chair.
"Ah, ah! What did she mean, that fool of a Bruyette? I knew you were too
well advised to be shivering at this hour in your stall."
The canon said not a word. The shepherd who was like all thinkers, a man
of hidden sense, was quite aware that sometimes old men have strange
crotchets, converse with the essence of occult things, and mumble to
themselves discourses concerning matters not under consideration; so
that, from reverence and great respect for the secret meditations of the
canon, he went and sat down at a distance, and waited the termination of
these dreams; noticing, silently the length of the good man's nails, which
looked like cobbler's awls, and looking attentively at the feet of his uncle,
he was astonished to see the flesh of his legs so crimson, that it reddened
his breeches and seemed all on fire through his hose.
He is dead, thought Chiquon. At this moment the door of the room
opened, and he still saw the canon, who, his nose frozen, came back from
church.
"Ho, ho!" said Chiquon, "my dear Uncle, are you out of your senses?
Kindly take notice that you ought not to be at the door, because you are
already seated in your chair in the chimney corner, and that it is
impossible for there to be two canons like you in the world."
"Ah! Chiquon, there was a time when I could have wished to be in two
places at once, but such is not the fate of a man, he would be too happy.
Are you getting dim-sighted? I am alone here."
Then Chiquon turned his head towards the chair, and found it empty; and
much astonished, as you will easily believe, he approached it, and found

 on the seat a little pat of cinders, from which ascended a strong odour of
sulphur.
"Ah!" said he merrily, "I perceive that the devil has behaved well towards
me--I will pray God for him."
And thereupon he related naively to the canon how the devil had amused
himself by playing at providence, and had loyally aided him to get rid of
his wicked cousins, the which the canon admired much, and thought very
good, seeing that he had plenty of good sense left, and often had
observed things which were to the devil's advantage. So the good old
priest remarked that 'as much good was always met with in evil as evil in
good, and that therefore one should not trouble too much after the other
world, the which was a grave heresy, which many councils have put
right'.
And this was how the Chiquons became rich, and were able in these
times, by the fortunes of their ancestors, to help to build the bridge of St.
Michael, where the devil cuts a very good figure under the angel, in
memory of this adventure now consigned to these veracious histories

 
Bankrupt
A short story by Alice Brown

Miss Dorcas True stood in her square front entry, saying good-by to
Phoebe Marsh. The entry would have been quite dark from its timestained woodwork and green paper, except for the twilight glimmer
swaying and creeping through the door leading into the garden. Out there
were the yellow of coreopsis, and the blue of larkspur, melted into a dim
magnificence of color, suffusing all the air; to one who knew what
common glory was a-blowing and a-growing there without, the bare
seclusion of the house might well seem invaded by it, like a heavenly
flood. Phoebe, too, in her pink calico, appeared to spread abroad the
richness of her youth and bloom, and radiate a certain light about her
where she stood. She was tall, her proportions were ample, and her waist
very trim. She had the shoulders and arms of the women of an elder
time, whom we classify vaguely now as goddesses. The Tiverton voices
argued that she would have been "real handsome if she'd had any sense
about doin' her hair;" which was brought down loosely over her ears, in
the fashion of her Aunt Phoebe's miniature. Miss Dorcas beside her looked
like one of autumn's brown, quiescent stems left standing by the way.
She was firmly built, yet all her lines subdued themselves to that
meagreness which ever dwells afar from beauty. The deep marks of hard
experience had been graven on her forehead, and her dark eyes burned
inwardly; the tense, concentrated spark of pain and the glowing of happy
fervor seemed as foreign to them as she herself to all the lighter joys and
hopes. Her only possibility of beauty lay in an abundance of soft dark
hair; but even that had been restricted and coiled into a compact,
utilitarian compass. She had laid one nervous hand on Phoebe's arm, and
she grasped the arm absently, from time to time, in talking, with
unconscious joy in its rounded warmth. She spoke cautiously, so that her
voice might not be heard within.
"Then you come over to-morrow, after the close of service, if it's
convenient. You can slip right into the kitchen, just as usual. Any news?"

 Phoebe, too, lowered her voice, but the full sweetness of its quality
thrilled out.
"Mary Frances Giles is going to be married next week. I've been down to
see her things. She's real pleased."
"You don't suppose they'll ask father to marry 'em?" Miss Dorcas spoke
quite eagerly.
"Oh, no, they can't! It's a real wedding, you know. It's got to be at the
house."
"Yes, of course it's got to! I knew that myself, but I couldn't help hoping.
Well, goodnight. You come Sunday."
Phoebe lifted her pink skirts about her, and stepped, rustling and stately,
down the garden walk. Miss Dorcas drew one deep breath of the outer
fragrance, and turned back into the house. A thin voice, enfeebled and
husky from old age, rose in the front room, as she entered:
"Dorcas! Dorcas! you had a caller?"
Her father, old Parson True, lay in the great bed opposite the window. A
thin little twig of a man, he was still animated, at times, by the power of a
strenuous and dauntless spirit. His hair, brushed straight back from the
overtopping forehead, had grown snowy white, and the eager, delicate
face beneath wore a strange pathos from the very fineness of its
nervously netted lines. Not many years after his wife's death, the parson
had shown some wandering of the wits; yet his disability, like his loss,
had been mercifully veiled from him. He took calmly to his bed, perhaps
through sheer lack of interest in life, and it became his happy invention
that he was "not feeling well," from one day to another, but that, on the
next Sunday, he should rise and preach. He seemed like an unfortunate
and uncomplaining child, and the village folk took pride in him as
something all their own; a pride enhanced by his habit, in this weak
estate, of falling back into the homely ways of speech he had used long
ago when he was a boy "on the farm." In his wife's day, he had stood in
the pulpit above them, and expounded scriptural lore in academic English;

 now he lapsed into their own rude phrasing, and seemed to rest content
in a tranquil certainty that nothing could be better than Tiverton ways and
Tiverton's homely speech.
"Dorcas," he repeated, with all a child's delight in his own cleverness,
"you've had somebody here. I heard ye!"
Dorcas folded the sheet back over the quilt, and laid her hand on his hair,
with all the tenderness of the strong when they let themselves brood over
the weak.
"Only Phoebe, on her way home," she answered, gently. "The doctor
visited her school to-day. She thinks he may drop in to see you to-night. I
guess he give her to understand so."
The minister chuckled.
"Ain't he a smart one?" he rejoined. "Smart as a trap! Dorcas, I 'ain't
finished my sermon. I guess I shall have to preach an old one. You lay me
out the one on the salt losin' its savor, an' I'll look it over."
"Yes, father."
The same demand and the same answer, varied but slightly, had been
exchanged between them every Saturday night for years. Dorcas replied
now without thinking. Her mind had spread its wings and flown out into
the sweet stillness of the garden and the world beyond; it even hastened
on into the unknown ways of guesswork, seeking for one who should be
coming. She strained her ears to hear the beating of hoofs and the rattle
of wheels across the little, bridge. The dusk sifted in about the house,
faster and faster; a whippoorwill cried from the woods. So she sat until
the twilight had vanished, and another of the invisible genii was at hand,
saying, "I am Night."
"Dorcas!" called the parson again. He had been asleep, and seemed now
to be holding himself back from a broken dream. "Dorcas, has your
mother come in yet?"

 "No, father."
"Well, you wake me up when you see her down the road; and then you go
an' carry her a shawl. I dunno what to make o' that cough!" His voice
trailed sleepily off, and Dorcas rose and tiptoed out of the room. She felt
the blood in her face; her ears thrilled noisily. The doctor's, wagon, had
crossed the bridge; now it was whirling swiftly up the road. She stationed
herself in the entry, to lose no step in his familiar progress. The horse
came lightly along, beating out a pleasant tune of easy haste. He was
drawn up at the gate, and the doctor threw out his weight, and jumped
buoyantly to the ground. There was the brief pause of reaching for his
medicine-case, and then, with that firm step whose rhythm she knew so
well, he was walking up the path. Involuntarily, as Dorcas awaited him,
she put her hand to her heart with one of those gestures that seem so
melodramatic and are so real; she owned to herself, with a throb of
appreciative delight, how the sick must warm at his coming. This new
doctor of Tiverton was no younger than Dorcas herself, yet with his erect
carriage and merry blue eye she seemed to be not only of another
temperament, but another time. It had never struck him that they were
contemporaries. Once he had told Phoebe, in a burst of affection and
pitying praise, that he should have liked Miss Dorcas for a maiden aunt.
"Good evening," he said, heartily, one foot on the sill. "How's the
patient?"
At actual sight of him, her tremor vanished, and she answered very
quietly,-"Father's asleep. I thought you wouldn't want he should be disturbed; so I
came out."
The doctor took off his hat, and pushed back his thick, unruly hair.
"Yes, that was right," he said absently, and pinched a spray of
southernwood that grew beside the door. "How has he seemed?"
"About as usual."

 "You've kept on with the tonic?"
"Yes."
"That's good! Miss Dorcas, look up there. See that moon! See that wisp of
an old blanket dragging over her face! Do you mind coming out and
walking up and down the road while we talk? I may think of one or two
directions to give about your father."
Dorcas stepped forward with the light obedience given to happy tasking.
She paused as! quickly.
"Oh!" she exclaimed. "I can't. Father might wake up. I never leave him
alone."
"Never mind, then! let's sit right down here on the steps. After all,
perhaps it's pleasanter. What a garden! It's like my mother's. I could pick
out every leaf in the dark, by the smell. But you're alone, aren't you? I'm
not keeping you from any one?"
"Oh, no! I'm all alone, except father."
"Yes. The fact is, I went into your school to-day, and the teacher said she
was coming here to-night. She offered to bring you a message, but I said
I should come myself. I'm abominably late. I couldn't get here any
earlier."
"Oh, yes! Phoebe! She was here over an hour ago. Phoebe's a real
comfort to me." She was seated on the step above him, and it seemed
very pleasant to her to hear his voice, without encountering also the
challenge of his eyes.
"No, is she though?" The doctor suddenly faced round upon her. "Tell me
about it!"
Then, quite to her surprise, Dorcas found herself talking under the spell of
an interest so eager that it bore her on, entirely without her own
guidance.

 "Well, you see there's a good many things I keep from father. He never's
been himself since mother died. She was the mainstay here. But he thinks
the church prospers just the same, and I never've told him the
attendance dropped off when they put up that 'Piscopal building over to
Sudleigh. You 'ain't lived here long enough to hear much about that, but
it's been a real trial to him. The summer boarders built it, and some rich
body keeps it up; and our folks think it's complete to go over there and
worship, and get up and down, and say their prayers out loud."
The doctor laughed out.
"I've heard about it," said he. "You know what Brad Freeman told Uncle
Eli Pike, when they went in to see how the service was managed?
Somebody found the places in the prayer-book for them, and Brad was
quick-witted, and got on very well; but Eli kept dropping behind. Brad
nudged him. 'Read!' he said out loud. 'Read like the devil!' I've heard that
story on an average of twice a day since I came to Tiverton. I'm not tired
of it yet!"
Miss Dorcas, too, had heard it, and shrunk from its undisguised profanity.
Now she laughed responsively.
"I guess they do have queer ways," she owned. "Well, I never let father
know any of our folks go over there. He'd be terrible tried. And I've made
it my part in our meeting to keep up the young folks' interest as much as
I can. I've been careful never to miss my Sunday-school class. They're all
girls, nice as new pins, every one of 'em! Phoebe was in it till a little while
ago, but now she comes here and sits in the kitchen while I'm gone. I
don't want father to know that, for I hope it never'll come into his head
he's so helpless; but I should be worried to death to have him left alone.
So Phoebe sits there with her book, ready to spring if she should hear
anything out o' the way."
The doctor had lapsed into his absent mood, but now he roused himself,
with sudden interest.
"That's very good of her, isn't it?" he said "You trust her, don't you?"

 "Trust Phoebe! Well, I guess I do! I've known her ever since she went to
Number Five, and now she's keeping the school herself. She's a real noble
girl!"
"Tell me more!" said the doctor, warmly. "I want to hear it all. You're so
new to me here in Tiverton! I want to get acquainted."
Miss Dorcas suddenly felt as if she had been talking a great deal, and an
overwhelming shyness fell upon her.
"There isn't much to tell," she hesitated. "I don't know's anything'd
happened to me for years, till father had his ill-turn in the spring, and we
called you in. He don't seem to realize his sickness was anything much.
I've told the neighbors not to dwell on it when they're with him. Phoebe
won't; she's got some sense."
"Has she?" said the doctor, still eagerly. "I'm glad of that, for your sake!"
He rose to go, but stood a moment near the steps, dallying with a
reaching branch of jessamine; it seemed persuading him to stay. He had
always a cheery manner, but to-night it was brightened by a dash of
something warm and reckless. He had the air of one awaiting good news,
in confidence of its coming. Dorcas was alive to the rapt contagion, and
her own blood thrilled. She felt young.
"Well!" said he, "well, Miss Dorcas!" He took a step, and then turned
back. "Well, Miss Dorcas," he said again, with an embarrassed laugh,
"perhaps you'd like to gather in one more church-goer. If I have time
tomorrow, I'll drop in to your service, and then I'll come round here, and
tell your father I went."
Dorcas rose impulsively. She could have stretched out her hands to him,
in the warmth of her gratitude.
"Oh, if you would! Oh, how pleased he'd be!"
"All right!" Now he turned away with decision. "Thank you, Miss Dorcas,
for staying out. It's a beautiful evening. I never knew such a June. Good-

 night!" He strode down the walk, and gave a quick word to his horse, who
responded in whinnying welcome. An instant's delay, another word, and
they were gone.
Dorcas stood listening to the scatter of hoofs down the dusty road and
over the hollow ledge. She sank back on the sill, and, step by step, tried
to retrace the lovely arabesque the hour had made. At last, she had some
groping sense of the full beauty of living, when friendship says to its
mate, "Tell me about yourself!" and the frozen fountain wells out, every
drop cheered and warmed, as it falls, in the sunshine of sympathy. She
saw in him that perfection of life lying in strength, which he undoubtedly
had, and beauty, of which he had little or much according as one chose to
think well of him. To her aching sense, he was a very perfect creature,
gifted with, infinite capacities for help and comfort.
But the footfalls ceased, and the garden darkened by delicate yet swift
degrees; a cloud had gone over the moon, fleecy, silver-edged, but still a
cloud. The waning of the light seemed to her significant; she feared lest
some bitter change might befall the moment; and went in, bolting the
door behind her. Once within her own little bedroom, she loosened her
hair, and moved about aimlessly, for a time, careless of sleep, because it
seemed so far. Then a sudden resolve nerved her, and she stole back
again to the front door, and opened it. The night was blossoming there,
glowing now, abundant. It was so rich, so full! The moonlight here, and
star upon star above, hidden not by clouds but by the light! Need she
waste this one night out of all her unregarded life? She stepped forth
among the flower-beds, stooping, in a passionate fervor, to the blossoms
she could reach; but, coming back to the southernwood, she took it in her
arms. She laid her face upon it, and crushed the soft leaves against her
cheeks. It made all the world smell of its own balm and dew. The
fragrance and beauty of the time passed into her soul, and awakened
corners there all unused to such sweet incense. She was drunken with the
wine that is not of grapes. She could not have found words for the
passion that possessed her, though she hugged it to her heart like
another self; but it was elemental, springing from founts deeper than
those of life and death. God made it, and, like all His making, it was
divine. She sat there, the southernwood still gathered into her arms, and
at last emotion stilled itself, and passed into thought; a wild temptation

 rose, and with its first whisper drove a hot flush into her cheeks, and
branded it there. Love! she had never named the name in its first natal
significance. She had scarcely read it; for romance, even in books, had
passed her by. But love! she knew it as the insect knows how to spread
his new sun-dried wings in the air for which he was create. Sitting there,
in a happy drowse, she thought it all out. She was old, plain, unsought;
the man she exalted was the flower of his kind. He would never look on
her as if she might touch the hem of wifehood's mantle; so there would
be no shame in choosing him. Just to herself, she might name the Great
Name. He would not know. Only her own soul would know, and God who
gave it, and sent it forth fitted with delicate, reaching tentacles to touch
the rock set there to wound them. She began to feel blindly that God was
not alone the keeper of eternal Sabbaths, but the germinant heat at the
heart of the world. If she were a young girl, like Phoebe, there would be
shame. Even a thought of him would be a stretching forth her hand to
touch him, saying, "Look at me! I am here!" but for her it was quite
different. It would be like a dream, some grandmother dreamed in the
sun, of rosy youth and the things that never came to pass. No one would
be harmed, and the sleeper would have garnered one hour's joy before
she took up her march again on the lonesomest road of all,--so lonesome,
although it leads us, home! Thus she thought, half sleeping, until the
night-dews clung in drops upon her hair; then she went in to bed, still
wrapped about with the drapery of her dreams.
Next morning, when Dorcas carried in her father's breakfast, she walked
with a springing step, and spoke in a voice so full and fresh it made her
newly glad.
"It's a nice day, father! There'll be lots of folks out to meeting."
"That's a good girl!" This was his commendation, from hour to hour; it
made up the litany of his gratitude for what she had been to him. "But I
dunno's I feel quite up to preachin' to-day, Dorcas!"
"That'll be all right, father. We'll get somebody."
"You bring me out my sermon-box after breakfast, an' I'll pick out one,"
said he, happily. "Deacon Tolman can read it."

 But, alas! Deacon Tolman had been dead this many a year!
A little later, the parson sat up in bed, shuffling his manuscript about with
nervous hands, and Dorcas, in the kitchen, stood washing her breakfast
dishes. That eager interest in living still possessed her. She began
humming, in a timid monotone. Her voice had the clearness of truth, with
little sweetness; and she was too conscious of its inadequacy to use it in
public, save under the compelling force of conscience. Hitherto, she had
only sung in Sunday-school, moved, as in everything, by the pathetic
desire of "doing her part;" but this morning seemed to her one for lifting
the voice, though not in Sunday phrasing. After a little thought, she
began thinly and sweetly,--

"Early one morning, just as the sun was rising,
I heard a maid sing in the valley below:
'O don't deceive me! O never leave me
How could you use a poor maiden so?'"

A gruff voice from the, doorway broke harshly in upon a measure.
"Yes! yes! Well! well! Tunin' up a larrady, ain't ye?"
Dorcas knew who it was, without turning round,--a dark, squat woman,
broad all over; broad in the hips, the waist, the face, and stamped with
the race-mark of high cheekbones. Her thick, straight black hair was cut
"tin-basin style;" she wore men's boots, and her petticoats were nearly up
to her knees.
"Good morning, Nancy!" called Dorcas, blithely, wringing out her
dishcloth. "Come right in, and sit down."
Nance Pete (in other words, Nancy the wife of Pete, whose surname was
unknown) clumped into the room, and took a chair by the hearth. She
drew forth a short black pipe, looked into it discontentedly, and then sat
putting her thumb in and out of the bowl.

 "You 'ain't got a mite o' terbacker about ye? Hey what?" she asked.
Dorcas had many a time been shocked at the same demand. This
morning, something humorous about it struck her, and she laughed.
"You know I haven't, Nancy Pete! Did you mend that hole in your skirt, as
I told you?"
Nance laboriously drew a back breadth of her coarse plaid skirt round to
the front, and displayed it, without a word. A three-cornered tear of the
kind known as a barn-door had been treated by tying a white string well
outside it, and gathering up the cloth, like a bag. Dorcas's sense of fitness
forbade her to see anything humorous in so original a device. She stood
before the woman in all the moral excellence of a censor fastidiously clad.
"O Nancy Pete!" she exclaimed. "How could you?"
Nance put her cold pipe in her mouth, and began sucking at the
unresponsive stem.
"You 'ain't got a bite of anything t' eat, have ye?" she asked, indifferently.
Dorcas went to the pantry, and brought forth pie, doughnuts and cheese,
and a dish of cold beans. The coffee-pot was waiting on the stove. One
would have said the visitor had been expected. Nance rose and tramped
over to the table. But Dorcas stood firmly in the way.
"No, Nancy, no! You wait a minute! Are you going to meeting to-day?"
"I 'ain't had a meal o' victuals for a week!" remarked Nance, addressing
no one in particular.
"Nancy, are you going to meeting?"
"Whose seat be I goin' to set in?" inquired Nance, rebelliously, yet with a
certain air of capitulation.

 "You can sit in mine. Haven't you sat there for the last five years? Now,
Nancy, don't hinder me!"
"Plague take it, then! I'll go!"
At this expected climax, Dorcas stood aside, and allowed her visitor to
serve herself with beans. When Nance's first hunger had been satisfied,
she began a rambling monologue, of an accustomed sort to which Dorcas
never listened.
"I went down to peek into the Poorhouse winders, this mornin'. There
they all sut, like rats in a trap. 'Got ye, 'ain't they?' says I. Old Sal Flint
she looked up, an' if there'd been a butcher-knife handy, I guess she'd ha'
throwed it. 'It's that Injun!' says she to Mis' Giles. 'Don't you take no
notice!' 'I dunno's I'm an Injun,' says I, 'I dunno how much Injun I be. I
can't look so fur back as that. I dunno's there's any more Injun in me
than there is devil in you!' I says. An' then the overseer he come out, an'
driv' me off. 'You won't git me in there,' says I to him, 'not so long's I've
got my teeth to chaw sassafras, an' my claws to dig me a holler in the
ground!' But when I come along, he passed me on the road, an' old Sal
Flint sut up by him on the seat, like a bump on a log. I guess he was
carryin' her over to that Pope-o'-Rome meetin' they've got over to
Sudleigh."
Dorcas turned about, in anxious interest.
"Oh, I wonder if he was! How _can_ folks give up their own meeting for
that?"
Nance pushed her chair back from the table.
"Want to see all kinds, I s'pose," she said, slyly. "Guess I'll try it myself,
another Sunday!"
"Anybody to home?" came a very high and wheezy voice from the
doorway. Dorcas knew that also, and so did Nance Pete.

 "It's that old haddock't lives up on the mountain," said the latter,
composedly, searching in her pocket, and then pulling out a stray bit of
tobacco and pressing it tenderly into her pipe.
An old man, dressed in a suit of very antique butternut clothes, stood at
the sill, holding forward a bunch of pennyroyal. He was weazened and
dry; his cheeks were parchment color, and he bore the look of an active
yet extreme old age. He was totally deaf. Dorcas advanced toward him,
taking a bright five-cent piece from her pocket. She held it out to him,
and he, in turn, extended the pennyroyal; but before taking it, she went
through a solemn pantomime. She made a feint of accepting the herb,
and then pointed to him and to the road.
"Yes, yes!" said the old man, irritably. "Bless ye! of course I'm goin' to
meetin'. I'll set by myself, though! Yes, I will! Las' Sunday, I set with Jont
Marshall, an' every time I sung a note, he dug into me with his elbow, till
I thought I should ha' fell out the pew-door. My voice is jest as good as
ever 'twas, an' sixty-five year ago come spring, I begun to set in the
seats."
The coin and pennyroyal changed ownership, and he tottered away,
chattering to himself in his senile fashion.
"Look here, you!" he shouted back, his hand on the gate. "Heerd anything
o' that new doctor round here? Well, he's been a-pokin' into my ears, an'
I guess he'd ha' cured me, if anybody could. You know I don't hear so
well's I used to. He went a-peekin' an' a-pryin' round my ears, as if he'd
found a hornet's nest. I dunno what he see there; I know he shook his
head. I guess we shouldn't ha' got no such a man to settle down here if
he wa'n't so asthmy he couldn't git along where he was. That's the reason
he come, they say. He's a bright one!"
Dorcas left her sweeping, and ran out after him. For the moment, she
forgot his hopeless durance in fleshly walls.
"Did he look at 'em?" she cried. "Did he? Tell me what he said!"

 "Why, of course I don't hear no better yit!" answered old Simeon, testily,
turning to stump away, "but that ain't no sign I sha'n't! He's a beauty! I
set up now, when he goes by, so's I can hear him when he rides back. I
put a quilt down in the fore-yard, an' when the ground trimbles a mite, I
git up to see if it's his hoss. Once I laid there till 'leven. He's a beauty, he
is!"
He went quavering down the road, and Dorcas ran back to the house,
elated afresh. An unregarded old man could give him the poor treasure of
his affection, quite unasked. Why should not she?
Nance was just taking her unceremonious leave. Her pockets bulged with
doughnuts, and she had wrapped half a pie in the Sudleigh "Star,"
surreptitiously filched from the woodbox.
"Well, I guess I'll be gittin' along towards meetin'," she said, in a tone of
unconcern, calculated to allay suspicion. "I'm in hopes to git a mite o'
terbacker out o' Hiram Cole, if he's settin' lookin' at his pigs, where he is
'most every Sunday. I'll have a smoke afore I go in."
"Don't you be late!"
"I'm a-goin' in late, or not at all!" answered Nance, contradictorily. "My
bunnit ain't trimmed on the congregation side, an' I want to give 'em a
chance to see it all round. I'm a-goin' up the aisle complete!"
Dorcas finished her work, and, having tidied her father's room, sat down
by his bedside for the simple rites that made their Sabbath holy. With the
first clanging stroke of the old bell, not half a mile away, they fell into
silence, waiting reverently through the necessary pause for allowing the
congregation to become seated. Then they went through the service
together, from hymn and prayer to the sermon. The parson had his
manuscript ready, and he began reading it, in the pulpit-voice of his
prime. At that moment, some of his old vigor came back to him, and he
uttered the conventional phrases of his church with conscious power;
though so little a man, he had always a sonorous delivery. After a page or
two, his hands began to tremble, and his voice sank.

 "You read a spell, Dorcas," he whispered, in pathetic apology. "I'll rest me
a minute." So Dorcas read, and he listened. Presently he fell asleep, and
she still went on, speaking the words mechanically, and busy with her
own tumultuous thoughts. Amazement possessed her that the world could
be so full of joy to which she had long been deaf. She could hear the
oriole singing in the elm; his song was almost articulate. The trees waved
a little, in a friendly fashion, through the open windows; friendly in the
unspoken kinship of green things to our thought, yet remote in their own
seclusion. One tall, delicate locust, gowned in summer's finest gear,
stirred idly at the top, as if through an inward motion, untroubled by the
wind. Dorcas's mind sought out the doctor, listening to the sermon in her
bare little church, and she felt quite content. She had entered the first
court of love, where a spiritual possession is enough, and asks no alms of
bodily nearness. When she came to the end of the sermon, her hands fell
in her lap, and she gave herself up without reserve to the idle delight of
satisfied dreaming. The silence pressed upon her father, and he opened
his eyes wide with the startled look of one who comprehends at once the
requirements of time and place. Then, in all solemnity, he put forth his
hands; and Dorcas, bending her head, received the benediction for the
congregation he would never meet again. She roused herself to bring in
his beef-tea, and at the moment of carrying away the tray, a step
sounded on the walk. She knew who it was, and smiled happily. The
lighter foot keeping pace beside it, she did not hear.
"Dorcas," said her father, "git your bunnit. It's time for Sunday-school."
"Yes, father."
The expected knock came at the door. She went forward, tying on her
bonnet, and her cheeks were pink. The doctor stood on the doorstone,
and Phoebe was with him. He smiled at Dorcas, and put out his hand.
This, according to Tiverton customs, was a warm demonstration at so
meaningless a moment; it seemed a part of his happy friendliness. It was
Phoebe who spoke.
"I'll stay outside while the doctor goes in. I can sit down here on the step.
Your father needn't know I am here any more than usual. I told the
doctor not to talk, coming up the walk."

 The doctor smiled at her. Phoebe looked like a rose in her Sunday white,
and the elder woman felt a sudden joy in her, untouched by envy of her
youth and bloom. Phoebe only seemed a part of the beautiful new laws to
which the world was freshly tuned, Dorcas coveted nothing; she envied
nobody. She herself possessed all, in usurping her one rich kingdom.
"All right," she said. "The doctor can step in now, and see father. I'll hurry
back, as soon as Sunday-school is over." She walked away, glancing
happily at the flowers on either side of the garden-path. She wanted to
touch all their leaves, because, last night, he had praised them.
Returning, when her hour was over, she walked very fast; her heart was
waking into hunger, and she feared he might be gone. But he was there,
sitting on the steps beside Phoebe, and when the gate swung open, they
did not hear. Phoebe's eyes were dropped, and she was poking her
parasol into the moss-encrusted path; the doctor was looking into her
face, and speaking quite eagerly. He heard Dorcas first, and sprang up.
His eyes were so bright and forceful in the momentary gleam of meeting
hers, that she looked aside, and tried to rule her quickening breath.
"Miss Dorcas," said he, "I'm telling this young lady she mustn't forget to
eat her dinner at school. I find she quite ignores it, if she has sums to do,
or blots to erase. Why, it's shocking."
"Of course she must eat her dinner!" said Dorcas, tenderly. "Why, yes, of
course! Phoebe, do as he tells you. He knows."
Phoebe blushed vividly.
"Does he?" she answered, laughing. "Well, I'll see. Good-by, Miss Dorcas.
I'll come in for Friday night meeting, if I don't before. Good-by."
"I'll walk along with you," said the doctor. "If you'll let me," he added,
humbly.
Phoebe turned away with a little toss of her head, and he turned, too,
breaking a sprig of southernwood. Dorcas was glad to treasure the last

 sight of him putting to his lips the fragrant herb she had bruised for his
sake. It seemed to carry over into daylight the joy of the richer night; it
was like seeing the silken thread on which her pearls were strung. She
called to them impetuously,-"Pick all the flowers you want to, both of you!" Then she went in, but she
said aloud to herself, "They're all for you--" and she whispered his name.
"Dorcas," said her father, "the doctor's been here quite a spell. He says
there was a real full meetin.' Even Nancy Pete, Dorcas! I feel as if my
ministration had been abundantly blessed."
Then, in that strangest summer in Dorcas's life, time seemed to stand
still. The happiest of all experiences had befallen her; not a succession of
joys, but a permanent delight in one unchanging mood. The evening of
his coming had been the first day; and the evening and the morning had
ever since been the same in glory. He came often, sometimes with
Phoebe, sometimes alone; and, being one of the men on whom women
especially lean, Dorcas soon found herself telling him all the poor trials of
her colorless life. Nothing was too small for his notice. He liked her
homely talk of the garden and the church, and once gave up an hour to
spading a plot where she wanted a new round bed. Dorcas had meant to
put lilies there, but she remembered he loved ladies'-delights; so she
gathered them all together from the nooks and corners of the garden, and
set them there, a sweet, old-fashioned company. "That's for thoughts!"
She took to wearing flowers now, not for the delight of him who loved
them, but merely as a part of her secret litany of worship. She slept
deeply at night, and woke with calm content, to speak one name in the
way that forms a prayer. He was her one possession; all else might be
taken away from her, but the feeling inhabiting her heart must live, like
the heart itself.
By the time September had yellowed all the fields, there came a week
when Phoebe's aunt, down at the Hollow, was known to be very ill; so
Phoebe no longer came to care for the parson through the Sunday-school
hour. But the doctor appeared, instead.

 "I'm Phoebe," he said, laughing, when Dorcas met him at the door. "She
can't come; so I told her I'd take her place."
These were the little familiar deeds which gilded his name among the
people. Dorcas had been growing used to them. But on the' next Sunday
morning, when she was hurrying about her kitchen, making early
preparations for the cold mid-day meal, a daring thought assailed her.
Phoebe might come to-day, and if the doctor also dropped in, she would
ask them both to dinner. There was no reason for inviting him alone;
besides, it was happier to sit by, leaving him to some one else. Then the
two would talk, and she, with no responsibility, could listen and look, and
hug her secret joy.
"I ain't a-goin' to meetin' to-day!" came Nance Pete's voice from the door.
She stood there, smoking prosperously, and took out her pipe, with a
jaunty motion, at the words. "I stopped at Kelup Rivers', on the way over,
an' they gi'n me a good breakfast, an' last week, that young doctor gi'n
me a whole paper o' fine-cut. I ain't a-goin' to meetin'! I'm goin' to se'
down under the old elm, an' have a real good smoke."
"O Nancy!" Dorcas had no dreams so happy that such an avalanche could
not sweep them aside. "Now, do! Why, you don't want me to think you go
to church just because I save you some breakfast!"
Nance turned away, and put up her chin to watch a wreath of smoke.
"I dunno why I don't," said she. "The world's nothin' but buy an' sell. You
know it, an' I know it!' 'Tain't no use coverin' on't up. You heerd the
news? That old fool of a Sim Barker's dead. The doctor, sut up all night
with him, an' I guess now he's layin' on him out. I wouldn't ha' done it!
I'd ha' wropped him up in his old coat, an' glad to git rid on him! Well, he
won't cheat ye out o' no more five-cent pieces, to squander in terbacker.
You might save 'em up for me, now he's done for!" Nance went stalking
away to the gate, flaunting a visible air of fine, free enjoyment, the
product of tobacco and a bright morning. Dorcas watched her, annoyed,
and yet quite helpless; she was outwitted, and she knew it. Perhaps she
sorrowed less deeply over the loss to her pensioner's immortal soul, thus
taking holiday from spiritual discipline, than the serious problem involved

 in subtracting one from the congregation. Would a Sunday-school picnic
constitute a bribe worth mentioning? Perhaps not, so far as Nance was
concerned; but her own class might like it, and on that young blood she
depended, to vivify the church.
A bit of pink came flashing along the country road. It was Phoebe, walking
very fast.
"Dear heart!" said Dorcas, aloud to herself, as the girl came hurriedly up
the path. She was no longer a pretty girl, a nice girl, as the
commendation went. Her face had gained an exalted lift; she was
beautiful. She took Miss Dorcas by the arms, and laughed the laugh that
knows itself in the right, and so will not be shy.
"Miss Dorcas," she said, "I've got to tell you right out, or I can't do it at
all. What should you say if I told you I was married?--to the doctor?"
Dorcas looked at her as if she did not hear.
"It's begun to get round," went on Phoebe, "and I wanted to give you the
word myself. You see, auntie was sick, and when he was there so much,
she grew to depend on him, and one day, when we'd been engaged a
week, she said, why shouldn't we be married, and he come right to the
house to live? He's only boarding, you know. And nothing to do but it
must be done right off, and so I--I said 'yes! And we were married,
Thursday. Auntie's better, and O Miss Dorcas! I think we're going to have
a real good time together." She threw her arms about Dorcas, and put
down her shining brown head upon them.
Dorcas tried to answer. When she did speak, her voice sounded thin and
faint, and she wondered confusedly if Phoebe could hear.
"I didn't know--" she said. "I didn't know--"
"Why, no, of course not!" returned Phoebe, brightly. "Nobody did. You'd
have been the first, but I didn't want the engagement talked about till
auntie was better. Oh, I believe that's his horse's step! I'll run out, and
ride home with him. You come, too, Miss Dorcas, and just say a word!"

 Dorcas loosened the girl's arms about her, and, bending to the bright
head, kissed it twice. Phoebe, grown careless in her joy, ran down the
walk to stop the approaching wagon; and when she looked round, Dorcas
had shut the door and gone in. She waited a moment for her to reappear,
and then, remembering the doctor had had no breakfast, she stepped into
the wagon, and they drove happily away.
Dorcas went to her bedroom, touching the walls, on the way, with her
groping hands. She sat down on the floor there, and rested her head
against a chair. Once only did she rouse herself, and that was to go into
the kitchen and set away the great bowl of _blanc-mange_ she had been
making for dinner. She had not strained it all, and the sea-weed was
drying on the sieve. Then she went back into the bedroom, and pulled
down the green slat curtains with a shaking hand. Twice her father called
her to bring his sermons, but she only answered, "Yes, father!" in dull
acquiescence, and did not move. She was benumbed, sunken in a gulf of
shame, too faint and cold to save herself by struggling. Her poor innocent
little fictions made themselves into lurid writings on her brain. She had
called him hers while another woman held his vows, and she was
degraded. Her soul was wrecked as truly as if the whole world knew it,
and could cry to her "Shame!" and "Shame!" The church-bells clanged out
their judgment of her. A new thought awakened her to a new despair.
She was not fit to teach in Sunday-school any more. Her girls, her
innocent, sweet girls! There was contagion in her very breath. They must
be saved from it; else when they were old women like her, some sudden
vice of tainted blood might rise up in them, no one would know why, and
breed disease and shame. She started to her feet. Her knees trembling
under her, she ran out of the house, and hid herself behind the great
lilac-bush by the gate.
Deacon Caleb Rivers came jogging past, late for church, but driving none
the less moderately. His placid-faced wife sat beside him; and Dorcas,
stepping out to stop them, wondered, with a wild pang of perplexity over
the things of this world, if 'Mandy Rivers had ever known the feeling of
death in the soul. Caleb pulled up.

 "I can't come to Sunday-school, to-day," called Dorcas, stridently. "You
tell them to give Phoebe my class. And ask her if she'll keep it. I sha'n't
teach any more."
"Ain't your father so well?" asked Mrs. Rivers, sympathetically, bending
forward and smoothing her mitts. Dorcas caught at the reason.
"I sha'n't leave him any more," she said. "You tell 'em so. You fix it."
Caleb drove on, and she went back into the house, shrinking under the
brightness of the air which seemed to quiver so before her eyes. She
went into her father's room, where he was awake and wondering.
"Seems to me I heard the bells," he said, in his gentle fashion. "Or have
we had the 'hymns, an' got to the sermon?"
Dorcas fell on her knees by the bedside.
"Father," she began, with difficulty, her cheek laid on the bedclothes
beside his hand, "there was a sermon about women that are lost. What
was that?"
"Why, yes," answered the parson, rousing to an active joy in his work.
"'Neither do I condemn thee!' That was it. You git it, Dorcas! We must
remember such poor creatur's; though, Lord be praised! there ain't many
round here. We must remember an' pray for 'em."
But Dorcas did not rise.
"Is there any hope for them, father?" she asked, her voice muffled. "Can
they be saved?"
"Why, don't you remember the poor creatur' that come here an' asked
that very question because she heard I said the Lord was pitiful? Her baby
was born out in the medder, an' died the next day; an' she got up out of
her sickbed at the Poorhouse, an' come totterin' up here, to ask if there
was any use in her sayin', 'Lord, be merciful to me, a sinner!' An' your
mother took her in, an' laid her down on this very bed, an' she died here.

 An' your mother hil' her in her arms when she died. You ask her if she
didn't!" The effort of continuous talking wearied him, and presently he
dozed off. Once he woke, and Dorcas was still on her knees, her head
abased. "Dorcas!" he said, and she answered, "Yes, father!" without
raising it; and he slept again. The bell struck, for the end of service. The
parson was awake. He stretched out his hand, and it trembled a moment
and then fell on his daughter's lowly head.
"The grace of our Lord Jesus Christ--" the parson said, and went clearly
on to the solemn close.
"Father," said Dorcas. "Father!" She seemed to be crying to One afar.
"Say the other verse, too. What He told the woman."
His hand still on her head, the parson repeated, with a wistful tenderness
stretching back over the past,-"'Neither do I condemn thee; go, and sin no more.'"

 
The Eye of Appollo
A short story by G. K. Chesterton

That singular smoky sparkle, at once a confusion and a transparency,
which is the strange secret of the Thames, was changing more and more
from its grey to its glittering extreme as the sun climbed to the zenith
over Westminster, and two men crossed Westminster Bridge. One man
was very tall and the other very short; they might even have been
fantastically compared to the arrogant clock-tower of Parliament and the
humbler humped shoulders of the Abbey, for the short man was in clerical
dress. The official description of the tall man was M. Hercule Flambeau,
private detective, and he was going to his new offices in a new pile of
flats facing the Abbey entrance. The official description of the short man
was the Reverend J. Brown, attached to St. Francis Xavier's Church,
Camberwell, and he was coming from a Camberwell deathbed to see the
new offices of his friend.
The building was American in its sky-scraping altitude, and American also
in the oiled elaboration of its machinery of telephones and lifts. But it was
barely finished and still understaffed; only three tenants had moved in;
the office just above Flambeau was occupied, as also was the office just
below him; the two floors above that and the three floors below were
entirely bare. But the first glance at the new tower of flats caught
something much more arresting. Save for a few relics of scaffolding, the
one glaring object was erected outside the office just above Flambeau's.
It was an enormous gilt effigy of the human eye, surrounded with rays of
gold, and taking up as much room as two or three of the office windows.
"What on earth is that?" asked Father Brown, and stood still. "Oh, a new
religion," said Flambeau, laughing; "one of those new religions that
forgive your sins by saying you never had any. Rather like Christian
Science, I should think. The fact is that a fellow calling himself Kalon (I
don't know what his name is, except that it can't be that) has taken the
flat just above me. I have two lady typewriters underneath me, and this

 enthusiastic old humbug on top. He calls himself the New Priest of Apollo,
and he worships the sun."
"Let him look out," said Father Brown. "The sun was the cruellest of all
the gods. But what does that monstrous eye mean?"
"As I understand it, it is a theory of theirs," answered Flambeau, "that a
man can endure anything if his mind is quite steady. Their two great
symbols are the sun and the open eye; for they say that if a man were
really healthy he could stare at the sun."
"If a man were really healthy," said Father Brown, "he would not bother
to stare at it."
"Well, that's all I can tell you about the new religion," went on Flambeau
carelessly. "It claims, of course, that it can cure all physical diseases."
"Can it cure the one spiritual disease?" asked Father Brown, with a
serious curiosity.
"And what is the one spiritual disease?" asked Flambeau, smiling.
"Oh, thinking one is quite well," said his friend.
Flambeau was more interested in the quiet little office below him than in
the flamboyant temple above. He was a lucid Southerner, incapable of
conceiving himself as anything but a Catholic or an atheist; and new
religions of a bright and pallid sort were not much in his line. But
humanity was always in his line, especially when it was good-looking;
moreover, the ladies downstairs were characters in their way. The office
was kept by two sisters, both slight and dark, one of them tall and
striking. She had a dark, eager and aquiline profile, and was one of those
women whom one always thinks of in profile, as of the clean-cut edge of
some weapon. She seemed to cleave her way through life. She had eyes
of startling brilliancy, but it was the brilliancy of steel rather than of
diamonds; and her straight, slim figure was a shade too stiff for its grace.
Her younger sister was like her shortened shadow, a little greyer, paler,
and more insignificant. They both wore a business-like black, with little

 masculine cuffs and collars. There are thousands of such curt, strenuous
ladies in the offices of London, but the interest of these lay rather in their
real than their apparent position.
For Pauline Stacey, the elder, was actually the heiress of a crest and half
a county, as well as great wealth; she had been brought up in castles and
gardens, before a frigid fierceness (peculiar to the modern woman) had
driven her to what she considered a harsher and a higher existence. She
had not, indeed, surrendered her money; in that there would have been a
romantic or monkish abandon quite alien to her masterful utilitarianism.
She held her wealth, she would say, for use upon practical social objects.
Part of it she had put into her business, the nucleus of a model
typewriting emporium; part of it was distributed in various leagues and
causes for the advancement of such work among women. How far Joan,
her sister and partner, shared this slightly prosaic idealism no one could
be very sure. But she followed her leader with a dog-like affection which
was somehow more attractive, with its touch of tragedy, than the hard,
high spirits of the elder. For Pauline Stacey had nothing to say to tragedy;
she was understood to deny its existence.
Her rigid rapidity and cold impatience had amused Flambeau very much
on the first occasion of his entering the flats. He had lingered outside the
lift in the entrance hall waiting for the lift-boy, who generally conducts
strangers to the various floors. But this bright-eyed falcon of a girl had
openly refused to endure such official delay. She said sharply that she
knew all about the lift, and was not dependent on boys--or men either.
Though her flat was only three floors above, she managed in the few
seconds of ascent to give Flambeau a great many of her fundamental
views in an off-hand manner; they were to the general effect that she
was a modern working woman and loved modern working machinery. Her
bright black eyes blazed with abstract anger against those who rebuke
mechanic science and ask for the return of romance. Everyone, she said,
ought to be able to manage machines, just as she could manage the lift.
She seemed almost to resent the fact of Flambeau opening the lift-door
for her; and that gentleman went up to his own apartments smiling with
somewhat mingled feelings at the memory of such spit-fire selfdependence.

 She certainly had a temper, of a snappy, practical sort; the gestures of
her thin, elegant hands were abrupt or even destructive.
Once Flambeau entered her office on some typewriting business, and
found she had just flung a pair of spectacles belonging to her sister into
the middle of the floor and stamped on them. She was already in the
rapids of an ethical tirade about the "sickly medical notions" and the
morbid admission of weakness implied in such an apparatus. She dared
her sister to bring such artificial, unhealthy rubbish into the place again.
She asked if she was expected to wear wooden legs or false hair or glass
eyes; and as she spoke her eyes sparkled like the terrible crystal.
Flambeau, quite bewildered with this fanaticism, could not refrain from
asking Miss Pauline (with direct French logic) why a pair of spectacles was
a more morbid sign of weakness than a lift, and why, if science might
help us in the one effort, it might not help us in the other.
"That is so different," said Pauline Stacey, loftily. "Batteries and motors
and all those things are marks of the force of man--yes, Mr. Flambeau,
and the force of woman, too! We shall take our turn at these great
engines that devour distance and defy time. That is high and splendid-that is really science. But these nasty props and plasters the doctors sell-why, they are just badges of poltroonery. Doctors stick on legs and arms
as if we were born cripples and sick slaves. But I was free-born, Mr.
Flambeau! People only think they need these things because they have
been trained in fear instead of being trained in power and courage, just as
the silly nurses tell children not to stare at the sun, and so they can't do it
without blinking. But why among the stars should there be one star I may
not see? The sun is not my master, and I will open my eyes and stare at
him whenever I choose."
"Your eyes," said Flambeau, with a foreign bow, "will dazzle the sun." He
took pleasure in complimenting this strange stiff beauty, partly because it
threw her a little off her balance. But as he went upstairs to his floor he
drew a deep breath and whistled, saying to himself: "So she has got into
the hands of that conjurer upstairs with his golden eye." For, little as he
knew or cared about the new religion of Kalon, he had heard of his special
notion about sun-gazing.

 He soon discovered that the spiritual bond between the floors above and
below him was close and increasing. The man who called himself Kalon
was a magnificent creature, worthy, in a physical sense, to be the pontiff
of Apollo. He was nearly as tall even as Flambeau, and very much better
looking, with a golden beard, strong blue eyes, and a mane flung back
like a lion's. In structure he was the blonde beast of Nietzsche, but all this
animal beauty was heightened, brightened and softened by genuine
intellect and spirituality. If he looked like one of the great Saxon kings, he
looked like one of the kings that were also saints. And this despite the
cockney incongruity of his surroundings; the fact that he had an office
half-way up a building in Victoria Street; that the clerk (a commonplace
youth in cuffs and collars) sat in the outer room, between him and the
corridor; that his name was on a brass plate, and the gilt emblem of his
creed hung above his street, like the advertisement of an oculist. All this
vulgarity could not take away from the man called Kalon the vivid
oppression and inspiration that came from his soul and body. When all
was said, a man in the presence of this quack did feel in the presence of a
great man. Even in the loose jacket-suit of linen that he wore as a
workshop dress in his office he was a fascinating and formidable figure;
and when robed in the white vestments and crowned with the golden
circlet, in which he daily saluted the sun, he really looked so splendid that
the laughter of the street people sometimes died suddenly on their lips.
For three times in the day the new sun-worshipper went out on his little
balcony, in the face of all Westminster, to say some litany to his shining
lord: once at daybreak, once at sunset, and once at the shock of noon.
And it was while the shock of noon still shook faintly from the towers of
Parliament and parish church that Father Brown, the friend of Flambeau,
first looked up and saw the white priest of Apollo.
Flambeau had seen quite enough of these daily salutations of Phoebus,
and plunged into the porch of the tall building without even looking for his
clerical friend to follow. But Father Brown, whether from a professional
interest in ritual or a strong individual interest in tomfoolery, stopped and
stared up at the balcony of the sun-worshipper, just as he might have
stopped and stared up at a Punch and Judy. Kalon the Prophet was
already erect, with argent garments and uplifted hands, and the sound of
his strangely penetrating voice could be heard all the way down the busy

 street uttering his solar litany. He was already in the middle of it; his eyes
were fixed upon the flaming disc. It is doubtful if he saw anything or
anyone on this earth; it is substantially certain that he did not see a
stunted, round-faced priest who, in the crowd below, looked up at him
with blinking eyes. That was perhaps the most startling difference
between even these two far divided men. Father Brown could not look at
anything without blinking; but the priest of Apollo could look on the blaze
at noon without a quiver of the eyelid.
"O sun," cried the prophet, "O star that art too great to be allowed among
the stars! O fountain that flowest quietly in that secret spot that is called
space. White Father of all white unwearied things, white flames and white
flowers and white peaks. Father, who art more innocent than all thy most
innocent and quiet children; primal purity, into the peace of which--"
A rush and crash like the reversed rush of a rocket was cloven with a
strident and incessant yelling. Five people rushed into the gate of the
mansions as three people rushed out, and for an instant they all deafened
each other. The sense of some utterly abrupt horror seemed for a
moment to fill half the street with bad news--bad news that was all the
worse because no one knew what it was. Two figures remained still after
the crash of commotion: the fair priest of Apollo on the balcony above,
and the ugly priest of Christ below him.
At last the tall figure and titanic energy of Flambeau appeared in the
doorway of the mansions and dominated the little mob. Talking at the top
of his voice like a fog-horn, he told somebody or anybody to go for a
surgeon; and as he turned back into the dark and thronged entrance his
friend Father Brown dipped in insignificantly after him. Even as he ducked
and dived through the crowd he could still hear the magnificent melody
and monotony of the solar priest still calling on the happy god who is the
friend of fountains and flowers.
Father Brown found Flambeau and some six other people standing round
the enclosed space into which the lift commonly descended. But the lift
had not descended. Something else had descended; something that ought
to have come by a lift.

 For the last four minutes Flambeau had looked down on it; had seen the
brained and bleeding figure of that beautiful woman who denied the
existence of tragedy. He had never had the slightest doubt that it was
Pauline Stacey; and, though he had sent for a doctor, he had not the
slightest doubt that she was dead.
He could not remember for certain whether he had liked her or disliked
her; there was so much both to like and dislike. But she had been a
person to him, and the unbearable pathos of details and habit stabbed
him with all the small daggers of bereavement. He remembered her
pretty face and priggish speeches with a sudden secret vividness which is
all the bitterness of death. In an instant like a bolt from the blue, like a
thunderbolt from nowhere, that beautiful and defiant body had been
dashed down the open well of the lift to death at the bottom. Was it
suicide? With so insolent an optimist it seemed impossible. Was it
murder? But who was there in those hardly inhabited flats to murder
anybody? In a rush of raucous words, which he meant to be strong and
suddenly found weak, he asked where was that fellow Kalon. A voice,
habitually heavy, quiet and full, assured him that Kalon for the last fifteen
minutes had been away up on his balcony worshipping his god. When
Flambeau heard the voice, and felt the hand of Father Brown, he turned
his swarthy face and said abruptly:
"Then, if he has been up there all the time, who can have done it?"
"Perhaps," said the other, "we might go upstairs and find out. We have
half an hour before the police will move."
Leaving the body of the slain heiress in charge of the surgeons, Flambeau
dashed up the stairs to the typewriting office, found it utterly empty, and
then dashed up to his own. Having entered that, he abruptly returned
with a new and white face to his friend.
"Her sister," he said, with an unpleasant seriousness, "her sister seems to
have gone out for a walk."
Father Brown nodded. "Or, she may have gone up to the office of that sun
man," he said. "If I were you I should just verify that, and then let us all

 talk it over in your office. No," he added suddenly, as if remembering
something, "shall I ever get over that stupidity of mine? Of course, in
their office downstairs."
Flambeau stared; but he followed the little father downstairs to the empty
flat of the Staceys, where that impenetrable pastor took a large redleather chair in the very entrance, from which he could see the stairs and
landings, and waited. He did not wait very long. In about four minutes
three figures descended the stairs, alike only in their solemnity. The first
was Joan Stacey, the sister of the dead woman--evidently she had been
upstairs in the temporary temple of Apollo; the second was the priest of
Apollo himself, his litany finished, sweeping down the empty stairs in
utter magnificence--something in his white robes, beard and parted hair
had the look of Dore's Christ leaving the Pretorium; the third was
Flambeau, black browed and somewhat bewildered.
Miss Joan Stacey, dark, with a drawn face and hair prematurely touched
with grey, walked straight to her own desk and set out her papers with a
practical flap. The mere action rallied everyone else to sanity. If Miss Joan
Stacey was a criminal, she was a cool one. Father Brown regarded her for
some time with an odd little smile, and then, without taking his eyes off
her, addressed himself to somebody else.
"Prophet," he said, presumably addressing Kalon, "I wish you would tell
me a lot about your religion."
"I shall be proud to do it," said Kalon, inclining his still crowned head, "but
I am not sure that I understand."
"Why, it's like this," said Father Brown, in his frankly doubtful way: "We
are taught that if a man has really bad first principles, that must be partly
his fault. But, for all that, we can make some difference between a man
who insults his quite clear conscience and a man with a conscience more
or less clouded with sophistries. Now, do you really think that murder is
wrong at all?"
"Is this an accusation?" asked Kalon very quietly.

 "No," answered Brown, equally gently, "it is the speech for the defence."
In the long and startled stillness of the room the prophet of Apollo slowly
rose; and really it was like the rising of the sun. He filled that room with
his light and life in such a manner that a man felt he could as easily have
filled Salisbury Plain. His robed form seemed to hang the whole room with
classic draperies; his epic gesture seemed to extend it into grander
perspectives, till the little black figure of the modern cleric seemed to be a
fault and an intrusion, a round, black blot upon some splendour of Hellas.
"We meet at last, Caiaphas," said the prophet. "Your church and mine are
the only realities on this earth. I adore the sun, and you the darkening of
the sun; you are the priest of the dying and I of the living God. Your
present work of suspicion and slander is worthy of your coat and creed.
All your church is but a black police; you are only spies and detectives
seeking to tear from men confessions of guilt, whether by treachery or
torture. You would convict men of crime, I would convict them of
innocence. You would convince them of sin, I would convince them of
virtue.
"Reader of the books of evil, one more word before I blow away your
baseless nightmares for ever. Not even faintly could you understand how
little I care whether you can convict me or no. The things you call
disgrace and horrible hanging are to me no more than an ogre in a child's
toy-book to a man once grown up. You said you were offering the speech
for the defence. I care so little for the cloudland of this life that I will offer
you the speech for the prosecution. There is but one thing that can be
said against me in this matter, and I will say it myself. The woman that is
dead was my love and my bride; not after such manner as your tin
chapels call lawful, but by a law purer and sterner than you will ever
understand. She and I walked another world from yours, and trod palaces
of crystal while you were plodding through tunnels and corridors of brick.
Well, I know that policemen, theological and otherwise, always fancy that
where there has been love there must soon be hatred; so there you have
the first point made for the prosecution. But the second point is stronger;
I do not grudge it you. Not only is it true that Pauline loved me, but it is
also true that this very morning, before she died, she wrote at that table
a will leaving me and my new church half a million. Come, where are the

 handcuffs? Do you suppose I care what foolish things you do with me?
Penal servitude will only be like waiting for her at a wayside station. The
gallows will only be going to her in a headlong car."
He spoke with the brain-shaking authority of an orator, and Flambeau and
Joan Stacey stared at him in amazed admiration. Father Brown's face
seemed to express nothing but extreme distress; he looked at the ground
with one wrinkle of pain across his forehead. The prophet of the sun
leaned easily against the mantelpiece and resumed:
"In a few words I have put before you the whole case against me--the
only possible case against me. In fewer words still I will blow it to pieces,
so that not a trace of it remains. As to whether I have committed this
crime, the truth is in one sentence: I could not have committed this
crime. Pauline Stacey fell from this floor to the ground at five minutes
past twelve. A hundred people will go into the witness-box and say that I
was standing out upon the balcony of my own rooms above from just
before the stroke of noon to a quarter-past--the usual period of my public
prayers. My clerk (a respectable youth from Clapham, with no sort of
connection with me) will swear that he sat in my outer office all the
morning, and that no communication passed through. He will swear that I
arrived a full ten minutes before the hour, fifteen minutes before any
whisper of the accident, and that I did not leave the office or the balcony
all that time. No one ever had so complete an alibi; I could subpoena half
Westminster. I think you had better put the handcuffs away again. The
case is at an end.
"But last of all, that no breath of this idiotic suspicion remain in the air, I
will tell you all you want to know. I believe I do know how my unhappy
friend came by her death. You can, if you choose, blame me for it, or my
faith and philosophy at least; but you certainly cannot lock me up. It is
well known to all students of the higher truths that certain adepts and
illuminati have in history attained the power of levitation--that is, of being
self-sustained upon the empty air. It is but a part of that general
conquest of matter which is the main element in our occult wisdom. Poor
Pauline was of an impulsive and ambitious temper. I think, to tell the
truth, she thought herself somewhat deeper in the mysteries than she
was; and she has often said to me, as we went down in the lift together,

 that if one's will were strong enough, one could float down as harmlessly
as a feather. I solemnly believe that in some ecstasy of noble thoughts
she attempted the miracle. Her will, or faith, must have failed her at the
crucial instant, and the lower law of matter had its horrible revenge.
There is the whole story, gentlemen, very sad and, as you think, very
presumptuous and wicked, but certainly not criminal or in any way
connected with me. In the short-hand of the police-courts, you had better
call it suicide. I shall always call it heroic failure for the advance of science
and the slow scaling of heaven."
It was the first time Flambeau had ever seen Father Brown vanquished.
He still sat looking at the ground, with a painful and corrugated brow, as
if in shame. It was impossible to avoid the feeling which the prophet's
winged words had fanned, that here was a sullen, professional suspecter
of men overwhelmed by a prouder and purer spirit of natural liberty and
health. At last he said, blinking as if in bodily distress: "Well, if that is so,
sir, you need do no more than take the testamentary paper you spoke of
and go. I wonder where the poor lady left it."
"It will be over there on her desk by the door, I think," said Kalon, with
that massive innocence of manner that seemed to acquit him wholly. "She
told me specially she would write it this morning, and I actually saw her
writing as I went up in the lift to my own room."
"Was her door open then?" asked the priest, with his eye on the corner of
the matting.
"Yes," said Kalon calmly.
"Ah! it has been open ever since," said the other, and resumed his silent
study of the mat.
"There is a paper over here," said the grim Miss Joan, in a somewhat
singular voice. She had passed over to her sister's desk by the doorway,
and was holding a sheet of blue foolscap in her hand. There was a sour
smile on her face that seemed unfit for such a scene or occasion, and
Flambeau looked at her with a darkening brow.

 Kalon the prophet stood away from the paper with that loyal
unconsciousness that had carried him through. But Flambeau took it out
of the lady's hand, and read it with the utmost amazement. It did, indeed,
begin in the formal manner of a will, but after the words "I give and
bequeath all of which I die possessed" the writing abruptly stopped with a
set of scratches, and there was no trace of the name of any legatee.
Flambeau, in wonder, handed this truncated testament to his clerical
friend, who glanced at it and silently gave it to the priest of the sun.
An instant afterwards that pontiff, in his splendid sweeping draperies, had
crossed the room in two great strides, and was towering over Joan
Stacey, his blue eyes standing from his head.
"What monkey tricks have you been playing here?" he cried. "That's not
all Pauline wrote."
They were startled to hear him speak in quite a new voice, with a Yankee
shrillness in it; all his grandeur and good English had fallen from him like
a cloak.
"That is the only thing on her desk," said Joan, and confronted him
steadily with the same smile of evil favour.
Of a sudden the man broke out into blasphemies and cataracts of
incredulous words. There was something shocking about the dropping of
his mask; it was like a man's real face falling off.
"See here!" he cried in broad American, when he was breathless with
cursing, "I may be an adventurer, but I guess you're a murderess. Yes,
gentlemen, here's your death explained, and without any levitation. The 
poor girl is writing a will in my favour; her cursed sister comes in,
struggles for the pen, drags her to the well, and throws her down before
she can finish it. Sakes! I reckon we want the handcuffs after all."
"As you have truly remarked," replied Joan, with ugly calm, "your clerk is
a very respectable young man, who knows the nature of an oath; and he
will swear in any court that I was up in your office arranging some

 typewriting work for five minutes before and five minutes after my sister
fell. Mr. Flambeau will tell you that he found me there."
There was a silence.
"Why, then," cried Flambeau, "Pauline was alone when she fell, and it was
suicide!"
"She was alone when she fell," said Father Brown, "but it was not
suicide."
"Then how did she die?" asked Flambeau impatiently.
"She was murdered."
"But she was alone," objected the detective.
"She was murdered when she was all alone," answered the priest.
All the rest stared at him, but he remained sitting in the same old
dejected attitude, with a wrinkle in his round forehead and an appearance
of impersonal shame and sorrow; his voice was colourless and sad.
"What I want to know," cried Kalon, with an oath, "is when the police are
coming for this bloody and wicked sister. She's killed her flesh and blood;
she's robbed me of half a million that was just as sacredly mine as--"
"Come, come, prophet," interrupted Flambeau, with a kind of sneer;
"remember that all this world is a cloudland."
The hierophant of the sun-god made an effort to climb back on his
pedestal. "It is not the mere money," he cried, "though that would equip
the cause throughout the world. It is also my beloved one's wishes. To
Pauline all this was holy. In Pauline's eyes--"
Father Brown suddenly sprang erect, so that his chair fell over flat behind
him. He was deathly pale, yet he seemed fired with a hope; his eyes
shone.

 "That's it!" he cried in a clear voice. "That's the way to begin. In Pauline's
eyes--"
The tall prophet retreated before the tiny priest in an almost mad
disorder. "What do you mean? How dare you?" he cried repeatedly.
"In Pauline's eyes," repeated the priest, his own shining more and more.
"Go on--in God's name, go on. The foulest crime the fiends ever
prompted feels lighter after confession; and I implore you to confess. Go
on, go on--in Pauline's eyes--"
"Let me go, you devil!" thundered Kalon, struggling like a giant in bonds.
"Who are you, you cursed spy, to weave your spiders' webs round me,
and peep and peer? Let me go."
"Shall I stop him?" asked Flambeau, bounding towards the exit, for Kalon
had already thrown the door wide open.
"No; let him pass," said Father Brown, with a strange deep sigh that
seemed to come from the depths of the universe. "Let Cain pass by, for
he belongs to God."
There was a long-drawn silence in the room when he had left it, which
was to Flambeau's fierce wits one long agony of interrogation. Miss Joan
Stacey very coolly tidied up the papers on her desk.
"Father," said Flambeau at last, "it is my duty, not my curiosity only--it is
my duty to find out, if I can, who committed the crime."
"Which crime?" asked Father Brown.
"The one we are dealing with, of course," replied his impatient friend.
"We are dealing with two crimes," said Brown, "crimes of very different
weight--and by very different criminals."

 Miss Joan Stacey, having collected and put away her papers, proceeded to
lock up her drawer. Father Brown went on, noticing her as little as she
noticed him.
"The two crimes," he observed, "were committed against the same
weakness of the same person, in a struggle for her money. The author of
the larger crime found himself thwarted by the smaller crime; the author
of the smaller crime got the money."
"Oh, don't go on like a lecturer," groaned Flambeau; "put it in a few
words."
"I can put it in one word," answered his friend.
Miss Joan Stacey skewered her business-like black hat on to her head
with a business-like black frown before a little mirror, and, as the
conversation proceeded, took her handbag and umbrella in an unhurried
style, and left the room.
"The truth is one word, and a short one," said Father Brown. "Pauline
Stacey was blind."
"Blind!" repeated Flambeau, and rose slowly to his whole huge stature.
"She was subject to it by blood," Brown proceeded. "Her sister would
have started eyeglasses if Pauline would have let her; but it was her
special philosophy or fad that one must not encourage such diseases by
yielding to them. She would not admit the cloud; or she tried to dispel it
by will. So her eyes got worse and worse with straining; but the worst
strain was to come. It came with this precious prophet, or whatever he
calls himself, who taught her to stare at the hot sun with the naked eye.
It was called accepting Apollo. Oh, if these new pagans would only be old
pagans, they would be a little wiser! The old pagans knew that mere
naked Nature-worship must have a cruel side. They knew that the eye of
Apollo can blast and blind."
There was a pause, and the priest went on in a gentle and even broken
voice. "Whether or no that devil deliberately made her blind, there is no

 doubt that he deliberately killed her through her blindness. The very
simplicity of the crime is sickening. You know he and she went up and
down in those lifts without official help; you know also how smoothly and
silently the lifts slide. Kalon brought the lift to the girl's landing, and saw
her, through the open door, writing in her slow, sightless way the will she
had promised him. He called out to her cheerily that he had the lift ready
for her, and she was to come out when she was ready. Then he pressed a
button and shot soundlessly up to his own floor, walked through his own
office, out on to his own balcony, and was safely praying before the
crowded street when the poor girl, having finished her work, ran gaily out
to where lover and lift were to receive her, and stepped--"
"Don't!" cried Flambeau.
"He ought to have got half a million by pressing that button," continued
the little father, in the colourless voice in which he talked of such horrors.
"But that went smash. It went smash because there happened to be
another person who also wanted the money, and who also knew the
secret about poor Pauline's sight. There was one thing about that will that
I think nobody noticed: although it was unfinished and without signature,
the other Miss Stacey and some servant of hers had already signed it as
witnesses. Joan had signed first, saying Pauline could finish it later, with a
typical feminine contempt for legal forms. Therefore, Joan wanted her
sister to sign the will without real witnesses. Why? I thought of the
blindness, and felt sure she had wanted Pauline to sign in solitude
because she had wanted her not to sign at all.
"People like the Staceys always use fountain pens; but this was specially
natural to Pauline. By habit and her strong will and memory she could still
write almost as well as if she saw; but she could not tell when her pen
needed dipping. Therefore, her fountain pens were carefully filled by her
sister--all except this fountain pen. This was carefully not filled by her
sister; the remains of the ink held out for a few lines and then failed
altogether. And the prophet lost five hundred thousand pounds and
committed one of the most brutal and brilliant murders in human history
for nothing."

 Flambeau went to the open door and heard the official police ascending
the stairs. He turned and said: "You must have followed everything
devilish close to have traced the crime to Kalon in ten minutes."
Father Brown gave a sort of start.
"Oh! to him," he said. "No; I had to follow rather close to find out about
Miss Joan and the fountain pen. But I knew Kalon was the criminal before
I came into the front door."
"You must be joking!" cried Flambeau.
"I'm quite serious," answered the priest. "I tell you I knew he had done it,
even before I knew what he had done."
"But why?"
"These pagan stoics," said Brown reflectively, "always fail by their
strength. There came a crash and a scream down the street, and the
priest of Apollo did not start or look round. I did not know what it was.
But I knew that he was expecting it."

 
The End of All Living
A short story by Alice Brown
The First Church of Tiverton stands on a hill, whence it overlooks the little
village, with one or two pine-shaded neighborhoods beyond, and, when
the air is clear, a thin blue line of upland delusively like the sea. Set thus
austerely aloft, it seems now a survival of the day when men used to go
to meeting gun in hand, and when one stayed, a lookout by the door, to
watch and listen. But this the present dwellers do not remember.
Conceding not a sigh to the holy and strenuous past, they lament--and
the more as they grow older--the stiff climb up the hill, albeit to rest in so
sweet a sanctuary at the top. For it is sweet indeed. A soft little wind
seems always to be stirring there, on summer Sundays a messenger of
good. It runs whispering about, and wafts in all sorts of odors: honey of
the milkweed and wild rose, and a Christmas tang of the evergreens just
below. It carries away something, too--scents calculated to bewilder the
thrift-hunting bee: sometimes a whiff of peppermint from an old lady's
pew, but oftener the breath of musk and southernwood, gathered in
ancient gardens, and borne up here to embroider the preacher's drowsy
homilies, and remind us, when we faint, of the keen savor of
righteousness.
Here in the church do we congregate from week to week; but behind it,
on a sloping hillside, is the last home of us all, the old burying-ground,
overrun with a briery tangle, and relieved by Nature's sweet and cunning
hand from the severe decorum set ordinarily about the dead. Our very
faithlessness has made it fair. There was a time when we were a little
ashamed of it. We regarded it with affection, indeed, but affection of the
sort accorded some rusty relative who has lain too supine in the rut of
years. Thus, with growing ambition came, in due course, the project of a
new burying-ground. This we dignified, even in common speech; it was
always grandly "the Cemetery." While it lay unrealized in the distance, the
home of our forbears fell into neglect, and Nature marched in, according
to her lavishness, and adorned what we ignored. The white alder crept
farther and farther from its bounds; tansy and wild rose rioted in
profusion, and soft patches of violets smiled to meet the spring. Here
were, indeed, great riches, "a little of everything" that pasture life

 affords: a hardy bed of checkerberry, crimson strawberries nodding on
long stalks, and in one sequestered corner the beloved Linnaea. It
seemed a consecrated pasture shut off from daily use, and so given up to
pleasantness that you could scarcely walk there without setting foot on
some precious outgrowth of the spring, or pushing aside a summer
loveliness better made for wear.
Ambition had its fulfillment. We bought our Cemetery, a large, green
tract, quite square, and lying open to the sun. But our pendulum had
swung too wide. Like many folk who suffer from one discomfort, we had
gone to the utmost extreme and courted another. We were tired of
climbing hills, and so we pressed too far into the lowland; and the first
grave dug in our Cemetery showed three inches of water at the bottom. It
was in "Prince's new lot," and there his young daughter was to lie. But her
lover had stood by while the men were making the grave; and, looking
into the ooze below, he woke to the thought of her fair young body there.
"God!" they heard him say, "she sha'n't lay so. Leave it as it is, an' come
up into the old buryin'-ground. There's room enough by me."
The men, all mates of his, stopped work without a glance and followed
him; and up there in the dearer shrine her place was made. The father
said but a word at her changed estate. Neighbors had hurried in to bring
him the news; he went first to the unfinished grave in the Cemetery, and
then strode up the hill, where the men had not yet done. After watching
them for a while in silence, he turned aside; but he came back to drop a
trembling hand upon the lover's arm.
"I guess," he said miserably, "she'd full as lieves lay here by you."
And she will be quite beside him, though, in the beaten ways of earth,
others have come between. For years he lived silently and apart; but
when his mother died, and he and his father were left staring at the
dulled embers of life, he married a good woman, who perhaps does not
deify early dreams; yet she is tender of them, and at the death of her
own child it was she who went toiling up to the graveyard, to see that its
little place did not encroach too far. She gave no reason, but we all knew

 it was because she meant to let her husband lie there by the long-loved
guest.
Naturally enough, after this incident of the forsaken grave, we conceived
a strange horror of the new Cemetery, and it has remained deserted to
this day. It is nothing but a meadow now, with that one little grassy
hollow in it to tell a piteous tale. It is mown by any farmer who chooses to
take it for a price; but we regard it differently from any other plot of
ground. It is "the Cemetery," and always will be. We wonder who has
bought the grass. "Eli's got the Cemetery this year," we say. And
sometimes awe-stricken little squads of school children lead one another
there, hand in hand, to look at the grave where Annie Prince was going to
be buried when her beau took her away. They never seem to connect that
heart-broken wraith of a lover with the bent farmer who goes to and fro
driving the cows. He wears patched overalls, and has sciatica in winter;
but I have seen the gleam of youth awakened, though remotely, in his
eyes. I do not believe he ever quite forgets; there are moments, now and
then, at dusk or midnight, all his for poring over those dulled pages of the
past.
After we had elected to abide by our old home, we voted an enlargement
of its bounds; and thereby hangs a tale of outlawed revenge. Long years
ago "old Abe Eaton" quarreled with his twin brother, and vowed, as the
last fiat of an eternal divorce, "I won't be buried in the same yard with
ye!"
The brother died first; and because he lay within a little knoll beside the
fence, Abe willfully set a public seal on that iron oath by purchasing a
strip of land outside, wherein he should himself be buried. Thus they
would rest in a hollow correspondence, the fence between. It all fell out
as he ordained, for we in Tiverton are cheerfully willing to give the dead
their way. Lax enough is the helpless hand in the fictitious stiffness of its
grasp; and we are not the people to deny it holding, by courtesy at least.
Soon enough does the sceptre of mortality crumble and fall. So Abe was
buried according to his wish. But when necessity commanded us to add
unto ourselves another acre, we took in his grave with it, and the fence,
falling into decay, was never renewed. There he lies, in affectionate

 decorum, beside the brother he hated; and thus does the greater good
wipe out the individual wrong.
So now, as in ancient times, we toil steeply up here, with the dead upon
his bier; for not often in Tiverton do we depend on that uncouth
monstrosity, the hearse. It is not that we do not own one,--a rigid box of
that name has belonged to us now for many a year; and when Sudleigh
came out with a new one, plumes, trappings, and all, we broached the
idea of emulating her. But the project fell through after Brad Freeman's
contented remark that he guessed the old one would last us out. He
"never heard no complaint from anybody 't ever rode in it." That placed
our last journey on a homely, humorous basis, and we smiled, and
reflected that we preferred going up the hill borne by friendly hands, with
the light of heaven falling on our coffin-lids.
The antiquary would set much store by our headstones, did he ever find
them out. Certain of them are very ancient, according to our ideas; for
they came over from England, and are now fallen into the grayness of
age. They are woven all over with lichens, and the blackberry binds them
fast. Well, too, for them! They need the grace of some such veiling; for
most of them are alive, even to this day, with warning skulls, and awful
cherubs compounded of bleak, bald faces and sparsely feathered wings.
One discovery, made there on a summer day, has not, I fancy, been
duplicated in another New England town. On six of the larger tombstones
are carved, below the grass level, a row of tiny imps, grinning faces and
humanized animals. Whose was the hand that wrought? The Tivertonians
know nothing about it. They say there was a certain old Veasey who,
some eighty odd years ago, used to steal into the graveyard with his
tools, and there, for love, scrape the mosses from the stones and chip the
letters clear. He liked to draw, "creatur's" especially, and would trace
them for children on their slates. He lived alone in a little house long since
fallen, and he would eat no meat. That is all they know of him. I can
guess but one thing more: that when no looker-on was by, he pushed
away the grass, and wrote his little jokes, safe in the kindly tolerance of
the dead. This was the identical soul who should, in good old days, have
been carving gargoyles and misereres; here his only field was the
obscurity of Tiverton churchyard, his only monument these grotesqueries
so cunningly concealed.

 We have epitaphs, too,--all our own as yet, for the world has not
discovered them. One couple lies in well-to-do respectability under a tiny
monument not much taller than the conventional gravestone, but shaped
on a pretentious model.
"We'd ruther have it nice," said the builders, "even if there ain't much of
it."
These were Eliza Marden and Peleg her husband, who worked from sun to
sun, with scant reward save that of pride in their own fore-handedness. I
can imagine them as they drove to church in the open wagon, a couple
portentously large and prosperous: their one child, Hannah, sitting
between them, and glancing about her, in a flickering, intermittent way,
at the pleasant holiday world. Hannah was no worker; she liked a long
afternoon in the sun, her thin little hands busied about nothing weightier
than crochet; and her mother regarded her with a horrified patience, as
one who might some time be trusted to sow all her wild oats of idleness.
The well-mated pair died within the same year, and it was Hannah who
composed their epitaph, with an artistic accuracy, but a defective sense of
rhyme:--

"Here lies Eliza
She was a striver
Here lies Peleg
He was a select Man"

We townsfolk found something haunting and bewildering in the lines; they
drew, and yet they baffled us, with their suggested echoes luring only to
betray. Hannah never wrote anything else, but we always cherished the
belief that she could do "'most anything" with words and their
possibilities. Still, we accepted her one crowning achievement, and never
urged her to further proof. In Tiverton we never look genius in the mouth.
Nor did Hannah herself propose developing her gift. Relieved from the
spur of those two unquiet spirits who had begotten her, she settled down

 to sit all day in the sun, learning new patterns of crochet; and having
cheerfully let her farm run down, she died at last in a placid poverty.
Then there was Desire Baker, who belonged to the era of colonial
hardship, and who, through a redundant punctuation, is relegated to a
day still more remote. For some stone-cutter, scornful of working by the
card, or born with an inordinate taste for periods, set forth, below her
_obiit_, the astounding statement:-"The first woman. She made the journey to Boston. By stage."
Here, too, are the ironies whereof departed life is prodigal. This is the tidy
lot of Peter Merrick, who had a desire to stand well with the world, in
leaving it, and whose purple and fine linen were embodied in the pomp of
death. He was a cobbler, and he put his small savings together to erect a
modest monument to his own memory. Every Sunday he visited it, "after
meetin'," and perhaps his day-dreams, as he sat leather-aproned on his
bench, were still of that white marble idealism. The inscription upon it was
full of significant blanks; they seemed an interrogation of the destiny
which governs man.
"Here lies Peter Merrick----" ran the unfinished scroll, "and his wife who
died----"
But ambitious Peter never lay there at all; for in his later prime, with one
flash of sharp desire to see the world, he went on a voyage to the Banks,
and was drowned. And his wife? The story grows somewhat threadbare.
She summoned his step-brother to settle the estate, and he, a marblecutter by trade, filled in the date of Peter's death with letters English and
illegible. In the process of their carving, the widow stood by, hands folded
under her apron from the midsummer sun. The two got excellent well
acquainted, and the stone-cutter prolonged his stay. He came again in a
little over a year, at Thanksgiving time, and they were married. Which
shows that nothing is certain in life,--no, not the proprieties of our leaving
it,--and that even there we must walk softly, writing no boastful legend
for time to annul.

 At one period a certain quatrain had a great run in Tiverton; it was the
epitaph of the day. Noting how it overspread that stony soil, you picture
to yourself the modest pride of its composer; unless, indeed, it had been
copied from an older inscription in an English yard, and transplanted
through the heart and brain of some settler whose thoughts were ever
flitting back. Thus it runs in decorous metre:--

"Dear husband, now my life is passed,
You have dearly loved me to the last.
Grieve not for me, but pity take
On my dear children for my sake."

But one sorrowing widower amended it, according to his wife's direction,
so that it bore a new and significant meaning. He was charged to

"pity take
On my dear parent for my sake."

The lesson was patent. His mother-in-law had always lived with him, and
she was "difficult." Who knows how keenly the sick woman's mind ran on
the possibilities of reef and quicksand for the alien two left alone without
her guiding hand? So she set the warning of her love and fear to be no
more forgotten while she herself should be remembered.
The husband was a silent man. He said very little about his intentions;
performance was enough for him. Therefore it happened that his
"parent," adopted perforce, knew nothing about this public charge until
she came upon it, on her first Sunday visit, surveying the new glory of the
stone. The story goes that she stood before it, a square, portentous figure
in black alpaca and warlike mitts, and that she uttered these irrevocable
words:-"Pity on _me_! Well, I guess he won't! I'll go to the poor-farm fust!"

 And Monday morning, spite of his loyal dissuasions, she packed her "blue
chist," and drove off to a far-away cousin, who got her "nussin'" to do.
Another lesson from the warning finger of Death: let what was life not
dream that it can sway the life that is, after the two part company.
Not always were mothers-in-law such breakers of the peace. There is a
story in Tiverton of one man who went remorsefully mad after his wife's
death, and whose mind dwelt unceasingly on the things he had denied
her. These were not many, yet the sum seemed to him colossal. It piled
the Ossa of his grief. Especially did he writhe under the remembrance of
certain blue dishes she had desired the week before her sudden death;
and one night, driven by an insane impulse to expiate his blindness, he
walked to town, bought them, and placed them in a foolish order about
her grave. It was a puerile, crazy deed, but no one smiled, not even the
little children who heard of it next day, on the way home from school, and
went trudging up there to see. To their stirring minds it seemed a strange
departure from the comfortable order of things, chiefly because their
elders stood about with furtive glances at one another and murmurs of
"Poor creatur'!" But one man, wiser than the rest, "harnessed up," and
went to tell the dead woman's mother, a mile away. Jonas was
"shackled;" he might "do himself a mischief." In the late afternoon, the
guest so summoned walked quietly into the silent house, where Jonas sat
by the window, beating one hand incessantly upon the sill, and staring at
the air. His sister, also, had come; she was frightened, however, and had
betaken herself to the bedroom, to sob. But in walked this little plump,
soft-footed woman, with her banded hair, her benevolent spectacles, and
her atmosphere of calm.
"I guess I'll blaze a fire, Jonas," said she. "You step out an' git me a mite
o' kindlin'."
The air of homely living enwrapped him once again, and mechanically,
with the inertia of old habit, he obeyed. They had a "cup o' tea" together;
and then, when the dishes were washed, and the peaceful twilight began
to settle down upon them like a sifting mist, she drew a little rocking chair
to the window where he sat opposite, and spoke.

 "Jonas," said she, in that still voice which had been harmonized by the
experiences of life, "arter dark, you jest go up an' bring home them blue
dishes. Mary's got an awful lot o' fun in her, an' if she ain't laughin' over
that, I'm beat. Now, Jonas, you do it! Do you s'pose she wants them nice
blue pieces out there through wind an' weather? She'd ruther by half see
'em on the parlor cluzzet shelves; an' if you'll fetch 'em home, I'll scallop
some white paper, jest as she liked, an' we'll set 'em up there."
Jonas wakened a little from his mental swoon. Life seemed warmer, more
tangible, again.
"Law, do go," said the mother soothingly. "She don't want the whole
township tramplin' up there to eye over her chiny. Make her as nervous
as a witch. Here's the ha'-bushel basket, an' some paper to put between
'em. You go, Jonas, an' I'll clear off the shelves."
So Jonas, whether he was tired of guiding the impulses of his own unquiet
mind, or whether he had become a child again, glad to yield to the
maternal, as we all do in our grief, took the basket and went. He stood
by, still like a child, while this comfortable woman put the china on the
shelves, speaking warmly, as she worked, of the pretty curving of the
cups, and her belief that the pitcher was "one you could pour out of." She
stayed on at the house, and Jonas, through his sickness of the mind, lay
back upon her soothing will as a baby lies in its mother's arms. But the
china was never used, even when he had come to his normal estate, and
bought and sold as before. The mother's prescience was too keen for that.
Here in this ground are the ambiguities of life carried over into that other
state, its pathos and its small misunderstandings. This was a muchmarried man whose last spouse had been a triple widow. Even to him the
situation proved mathematically complex, and the sumptuous stone to
her memory bears the dizzying legend that "Enoch Nudd who erects this
stone is her fourth husband and his fifth wife." Perhaps it was the
exigencies of space which brought about this amazing elision; but surely,
in its very apparent intention, there is only a modest pride. For
indubitably the much-married may plume themselves upon being also the
widely sought. If it is the crown of sex to be desired, here you have it,

 under seal of the civil bond. No baseless, windy boasting that "I might an
if I would!" Nay, here be the marriage ties to testify.
In this pleasant, weedy corner is a little white stone, not so long erected.
"I shall arise in thine image," runs the inscription; and reading it, you
shall remember that the dust within belonged to a little hunchback, who
played the fiddle divinely, and had beseeching eyes. With that cry he
escaped from the marred conditions of the clay. Here, too (for this is a
sort of bachelor nook), is the grave of a man whom we unconsciously
thrust into a permanent masquerade. Years and years ago he broke into a
house,--an unknown felony in our quiet limits,--and was incontinently
shot. The burglar lost his arm, and went about at first under a cloud of
disgrace and horror, which became, with healing of the public conscience,
a veil of sympathy. After his brief imprisonment indoors, during the
healing of the mutilated stump, he came forth among us again, a man
sadder and wiser in that he had learned how slow and sure may be the
road to wealth. He had sown his wild oats in one night's foolish work, and
now he settled down to doing such odd jobs as he might with one hand.
We got accustomed to his loss. Those of us who were children when it
happened never really discovered that it was disgrace at all; we called it
misfortune, and no one said us nay. Then one day it occurred to us that
he must have been shot "in the war," and so, all unwittingly to himself,
the silent man became a hero. We accepted him. He was part of our
poetic time, and when he died, we held him still in remembrance among
those who fell worthily. When Decoration Day was first observed in
Tiverton, one of us thought of him, and dropped some apple blossoms on
his grave; and so it had its posy like the rest, although it bore no flag. It
was the doctor who set us right there. "I wouldn't do that," he said,
withholding the hand of one unthinking child; and she took back her flag.
But she left the blossoms, and, being fond of precedent, we still do the
same; unless we stop to think, we know not why. You may say there is
here some perfidy to the republic and the honored dead, or at least some
laxity of morals. We are lax, indeed, but possibly that is why we are so
kind. We are not willing to "hurt folks' feelings" even when they have
migrated to another star; and a flower more or less from the overplus
given to men who made the greater choice will do no harm, tossed to one
whose soul may be sitting, like Lazarus, at their riches' gate.

 But of all these fleeting legends made to, hold the soul a moment on its
way, and keep it here in fickle permanence, one is more dramatic than
all, more charged with power and pathos. Years ago there came into
Tiverton an unknown man, very handsome, showing the marks of high
breeding, and yet in his bearing strangely solitary and remote. He wore a
cloak, and had a foreign look. He came walking into the town one night,
with dust upon his shoes, and we judged that he had been traveling a
long time. He had the appearance of one who was not nearly at his
journey's end, and would pass through the village, continuing on a longer
way. He glanced at no one, but we all stared at him. He seemed, though
we had not the words to put it so, an exiled prince. He went straight
through Tiverton Street until he came to the parsonage; and something
about it (perhaps its garden, hot with flowers, larkspur, coreopsis, and
the rest) detained his eye, and he walked in. Next day the old doctor was
there also with his little black case, but we were none the wiser for that;
for the old doctor was of the sort who intrench themselves in a
professional reserve. You might draw up beside the road to question him,
but you could as well deter the course of nature. He would give the roan a
flick, and his sulky would flash by.
"What's the matter with so-and-so?" would ask a mousing neighbor.
"He's sick," ran the laconic reply.
"Goin' to die?" one daring querist ventured further.
"Some time," said the doctor.
But though he assumed a right to combat thus the outer world, no one
was gentler with a sick man or with those about him in their grief. To the
latter he would speak; but he used to say he drew his line at second
cousins.
Into his hands and the true old parson's fell the stranger's confidence, if
confidence it were. He may have died solitary and unexplained; but no
matter what he said, his story was safe. In a week he was carried out for
burial; and so solemn was the parson's manner as he spoke a brief
service over him, so thrilling his enunciation of the words "our brother,"

 that we dared not even ask what else he should be called. And we never
knew. The headstone, set up by the parson, bore the words "Peccator
Maximus." For a long time we thought they made the stranger's name,
and, judged that he must have been a foreigner; but a new
schoolmistress taught us otherwise. It was Latin, she said, and it meant
"the chiefest among sinners." When that report flew round, the parson
got wind of it, and then, in the pulpit one morning, he announced that he
felt it necessary to say that the words had been used "at our brother's
request," and that it was his own decision to write below them, "For this
cause came I into the world."
We have accepted the stranger as we accept many things in Tiverton.
Parson and doctor kept his secret well. He is quite safe from our
questioning; but for years I expected a lady, always young and full of
grief, to seek out his grave and shrive him with her tears. She will not
appear now, unless she come as an old, old woman, to lie beside him. It
is too late.
One more record of our vanished time,--this full of poesy only, and the
pathos of farewell. It was not the aged and heartsick alone who lay down
here to rest We have been no more fortunate than others. Youth and
beauty came also, and returned no more. This, where the white rose-bush
grows untended, was the young daughter of a squire in far-off days: too
young to have known the pangs of love or the sweet desire of Death, save
that, in primrose time, he always paints himself so fair. I have thought
the inscription must have been borrowed from another grave, in some
yard shaded by yews and silent under the cawing of the rooks; perhaps,
from its stiffness, translated from a stately Latin verse. This it is,
snatched not too soon from oblivion; for a few more years will wear it
quite away:--

"Here lies the purple flower of a maid
Having to envious Death due tribute paid.
Her sudden Loss her Parents did lament,
And all her Friends with grief their hearts did Rent.
Life's short. Your wicked Lives amend with care,
For Mortals know we Dust and Shadows are."

 "The purple flower of a maid!" All the blossomy sweetness, the fragrant
lamenting of Lycidas, lies in that one line. Alas, poor love-lies-bleeding!
And yet not poor according to the barren pity we accord the dead, but
dowered with another youth set like a crown upon the unstained front of
this. Not going with sparse blossoms ripened or decayed, but heaped with
buds and dripping over in perfume. She seems so sweet in her still
loveliness, the empty promise of her balmy spring, that for a moment fain
are you to snatch her back into the pageant of your day. Reading that
phrase, you feel the earth is poorer for her loss. And yet not so, since the
world holds other greater worlds as well. Elsewhere she may have grown
to age and stature; but here she lives yet in beauteous permanence,--as
true a part of youth and joy and rapture as the immortal figures on the
Grecian Urn. While she was but a flying phantom on the frieze of time,
Death fixed her there forever,--a haunting spirit in perennial bliss.

 
The End of All Living
A short story by Alice Brown
The First Church of Tiverton stands on a hill, whence it overlooks the little
village, with one or two pine-shaded neighborhoods beyond, and, when
the air is clear, a thin blue line of upland delusively like the sea. Set thus
austerely aloft, it seems now a survival of the day when men used to go
to meeting gun in hand, and when one stayed, a lookout by the door, to
watch and listen. But this the present dwellers do not remember.
Conceding not a sigh to the holy and strenuous past, they lament--and
the more as they grow older--the stiff climb up the hill, albeit to rest in so
sweet a sanctuary at the top. For it is sweet indeed. A soft little wind
seems always to be stirring there, on summer Sundays a messenger of
good. It runs whispering about, and wafts in all sorts of odors: honey of
the milkweed and wild rose, and a Christmas tang of the evergreens just
below. It carries away something, too--scents calculated to bewilder the
thrift-hunting bee: sometimes a whiff of peppermint from an old lady's
pew, but oftener the breath of musk and southernwood, gathered in
ancient gardens, and borne up here to embroider the preacher's drowsy
homilies, and remind us, when we faint, of the keen savor of
righteousness.
Here in the church do we congregate from week to week; but behind it,
on a sloping hillside, is the last home of us all, the old burying-ground,
overrun with a briery tangle, and relieved by Nature's sweet and cunning
hand from the severe decorum set ordinarily about the dead. Our very
faithlessness has made it fair. There was a time when we were a little
ashamed of it. We regarded it with affection, indeed, but affection of the
sort accorded some rusty relative who has lain too supine in the rut of
years. Thus, with growing ambition came, in due course, the project of a
new burying-ground. This we dignified, even in common speech; it was
always grandly "the Cemetery." While it lay unrealized in the distance, the
home of our forbears fell into neglect, and Nature marched in, according
to her lavishness, and adorned what we ignored. The white alder crept
farther and farther from its bounds; tansy and wild rose rioted in
profusion, and soft patches of violets smiled to meet the spring. Here
were, indeed, great riches, "a little of everything" that pasture life

 affords: a hardy bed of checkerberry, crimson strawberries nodding on
long stalks, and in one sequestered corner the beloved Linnaea. It
seemed a consecrated pasture shut off from daily use, and so given up to
pleasantness that you could scarcely walk there without setting foot on
some precious outgrowth of the spring, or pushing aside a summer
loveliness better made for wear.
Ambition had its fulfillment. We bought our Cemetery, a large, green
tract, quite square, and lying open to the sun. But our pendulum had
swung too wide. Like many folk who suffer from one discomfort, we had
gone to the utmost extreme and courted another. We were tired of
climbing hills, and so we pressed too far into the lowland; and the first
grave dug in our Cemetery showed three inches of water at the bottom. It
was in "Prince's new lot," and there his young daughter was to lie. But her
lover had stood by while the men were making the grave; and, looking
into the ooze below, he woke to the thought of her fair young body there.
"God!" they heard him say, "she sha'n't lay so. Leave it as it is, an' come
up into the old buryin'-ground. There's room enough by me."
The men, all mates of his, stopped work without a glance and followed
him; and up there in the dearer shrine her place was made. The father
said but a word at her changed estate. Neighbors had hurried in to bring
him the news; he went first to the unfinished grave in the Cemetery, and
then strode up the hill, where the men had not yet done. After watching
them for a while in silence, he turned aside; but he came back to drop a
trembling hand upon the lover's arm.
"I guess," he said miserably, "she'd full as lieves lay here by you."
And she will be quite beside him, though, in the beaten ways of earth,
others have come between. For years he lived silently and apart; but
when his mother died, and he and his father were left staring at the
dulled embers of life, he married a good woman, who perhaps does not
deify early dreams; yet she is tender of them, and at the death of her
own child it was she who went toiling up to the graveyard, to see that its
little place did not encroach too far. She gave no reason, but we all knew

 it was because she meant to let her husband lie there by the long-loved
guest.
Naturally enough, after this incident of the forsaken grave, we conceived
a strange horror of the new Cemetery, and it has remained deserted to
this day. It is nothing but a meadow now, with that one little grassy
hollow in it to tell a piteous tale. It is mown by any farmer who chooses to
take it for a price; but we regard it differently from any other plot of
ground. It is "the Cemetery," and always will be. We wonder who has
bought the grass. "Eli's got the Cemetery this year," we say. And
sometimes awe-stricken little squads of school children lead one another
there, hand in hand, to look at the grave where Annie Prince was going to
be buried when her beau took her away. They never seem to connect that
heart-broken wraith of a lover with the bent farmer who goes to and fro
driving the cows. He wears patched overalls, and has sciatica in winter;
but I have seen the gleam of youth awakened, though remotely, in his
eyes. I do not believe he ever quite forgets; there are moments, now and
then, at dusk or midnight, all his for poring over those dulled pages of the
past.
After we had elected to abide by our old home, we voted an enlargement
of its bounds; and thereby hangs a tale of outlawed revenge. Long years
ago "old Abe Eaton" quarreled with his twin brother, and vowed, as the
last fiat of an eternal divorce, "I won't be buried in the same yard with
ye!"
The brother died first; and because he lay within a little knoll beside the
fence, Abe willfully set a public seal on that iron oath by purchasing a
strip of land outside, wherein he should himself be buried. Thus they
would rest in a hollow correspondence, the fence between. It all fell out
as he ordained, for we in Tiverton are cheerfully willing to give the dead
their way. Lax enough is the helpless hand in the fictitious stiffness of its
grasp; and we are not the people to deny it holding, by courtesy at least.
Soon enough does the sceptre of mortality crumble and fall. So Abe was
buried according to his wish. But when necessity commanded us to add
unto ourselves another acre, we took in his grave with it, and the fence,
falling into decay, was never renewed. There he lies, in affectionate

 decorum, beside the brother he hated; and thus does the greater good
wipe out the individual wrong.
So now, as in ancient times, we toil steeply up here, with the dead upon
his bier; for not often in Tiverton do we depend on that uncouth
monstrosity, the hearse. It is not that we do not own one,--a rigid box of
that name has belonged to us now for many a year; and when Sudleigh
came out with a new one, plumes, trappings, and all, we broached the
idea of emulating her. But the project fell through after Brad Freeman's
contented remark that he guessed the old one would last us out. He
"never heard no complaint from anybody 't ever rode in it." That placed
our last journey on a homely, humorous basis, and we smiled, and
reflected that we preferred going up the hill borne by friendly hands, with
the light of heaven falling on our coffin-lids.
The antiquary would set much store by our headstones, did he ever find
them out. Certain of them are very ancient, according to our ideas; for
they came over from England, and are now fallen into the grayness of
age. They are woven all over with lichens, and the blackberry binds them
fast. Well, too, for them! They need the grace of some such veiling; for
most of them are alive, even to this day, with warning skulls, and awful
cherubs compounded of bleak, bald faces and sparsely feathered wings.
One discovery, made there on a summer day, has not, I fancy, been
duplicated in another New England town. On six of the larger tombstones
are carved, below the grass level, a row of tiny imps, grinning faces and
humanized animals. Whose was the hand that wrought? The Tivertonians
know nothing about it. They say there was a certain old Veasey who,
some eighty odd years ago, used to steal into the graveyard with his
tools, and there, for love, scrape the mosses from the stones and chip the
letters clear. He liked to draw, "creatur's" especially, and would trace
them for children on their slates. He lived alone in a little house long since
fallen, and he would eat no meat. That is all they know of him. I can
guess but one thing more: that when no looker-on was by, he pushed
away the grass, and wrote his little jokes, safe in the kindly tolerance of
the dead. This was the identical soul who should, in good old days, have
been carving gargoyles and misereres; here his only field was the
obscurity of Tiverton churchyard, his only monument these grotesqueries
so cunningly concealed.

 We have epitaphs, too,--all our own as yet, for the world has not
discovered them. One couple lies in well-to-do respectability under a tiny
monument not much taller than the conventional gravestone, but shaped
on a pretentious model.
"We'd ruther have it nice," said the builders, "even if there ain't much of
it."
These were Eliza Marden and Peleg her husband, who worked from sun to
sun, with scant reward save that of pride in their own fore-handedness. I
can imagine them as they drove to church in the open wagon, a couple
portentously large and prosperous: their one child, Hannah, sitting
between them, and glancing about her, in a flickering, intermittent way,
at the pleasant holiday world. Hannah was no worker; she liked a long
afternoon in the sun, her thin little hands busied about nothing weightier
than crochet; and her mother regarded her with a horrified patience, as
one who might some time be trusted to sow all her wild oats of idleness.
The well-mated pair died within the same year, and it was Hannah who
composed their epitaph, with an artistic accuracy, but a defective sense of
rhyme:--

"Here lies Eliza
She was a striver
Here lies Peleg
He was a select Man"

We townsfolk found something haunting and bewildering in the lines; they
drew, and yet they baffled us, with their suggested echoes luring only to
betray. Hannah never wrote anything else, but we always cherished the
belief that she could do "'most anything" with words and their
possibilities. Still, we accepted her one crowning achievement, and never
urged her to further proof. In Tiverton we never look genius in the mouth.
Nor did Hannah herself propose developing her gift. Relieved from the
spur of those two unquiet spirits who had begotten her, she settled down

 to sit all day in the sun, learning new patterns of crochet; and having
cheerfully let her farm run down, she died at last in a placid poverty.
Then there was Desire Baker, who belonged to the era of colonial
hardship, and who, through a redundant punctuation, is relegated to a
day still more remote. For some stone-cutter, scornful of working by the
card, or born with an inordinate taste for periods, set forth, below her
_obiit_, the astounding statement:-"The first woman. She made the journey to Boston. By stage."
Here, too, are the ironies whereof departed life is prodigal. This is the tidy
lot of Peter Merrick, who had a desire to stand well with the world, in
leaving it, and whose purple and fine linen were embodied in the pomp of
death. He was a cobbler, and he put his small savings together to erect a
modest monument to his own memory. Every Sunday he visited it, "after
meetin'," and perhaps his day-dreams, as he sat leather-aproned on his
bench, were still of that white marble idealism. The inscription upon it was
full of significant blanks; they seemed an interrogation of the destiny
which governs man.
"Here lies Peter Merrick----" ran the unfinished scroll, "and his wife who
died----"
But ambitious Peter never lay there at all; for in his later prime, with one
flash of sharp desire to see the world, he went on a voyage to the Banks,
and was drowned. And his wife? The story grows somewhat threadbare.
She summoned his step-brother to settle the estate, and he, a marblecutter by trade, filled in the date of Peter's death with letters English and
illegible. In the process of their carving, the widow stood by, hands folded
under her apron from the midsummer sun. The two got excellent well
acquainted, and the stone-cutter prolonged his stay. He came again in a
little over a year, at Thanksgiving time, and they were married. Which
shows that nothing is certain in life,--no, not the proprieties of our leaving
it,--and that even there we must walk softly, writing no boastful legend
for time to annul.

 At one period a certain quatrain had a great run in Tiverton; it was the
epitaph of the day. Noting how it overspread that stony soil, you picture
to yourself the modest pride of its composer; unless, indeed, it had been
copied from an older inscription in an English yard, and transplanted
through the heart and brain of some settler whose thoughts were ever
flitting back. Thus it runs in decorous metre:--

"Dear husband, now my life is passed,
You have dearly loved me to the last.
Grieve not for me, but pity take
On my dear children for my sake."

But one sorrowing widower amended it, according to his wife's direction,
so that it bore a new and significant meaning. He was charged to

"pity take
On my dear parent for my sake."

The lesson was patent. His mother-in-law had always lived with him, and
she was "difficult." Who knows how keenly the sick woman's mind ran on
the possibilities of reef and quicksand for the alien two left alone without
her guiding hand? So she set the warning of her love and fear to be no
more forgotten while she herself should be remembered.
The husband was a silent man. He said very little about his intentions;
performance was enough for him. Therefore it happened that his
"parent," adopted perforce, knew nothing about this public charge until
she came upon it, on her first Sunday visit, surveying the new glory of the
stone. The story goes that she stood before it, a square, portentous figure
in black alpaca and warlike mitts, and that she uttered these irrevocable
words:-"Pity on _me_! Well, I guess he won't! I'll go to the poor-farm fust!"

 And Monday morning, spite of his loyal dissuasions, she packed her "blue
chist," and drove off to a far-away cousin, who got her "nussin'" to do.
Another lesson from the warning finger of Death: let what was life not
dream that it can sway the life that is, after the two part company.
Not always were mothers-in-law such breakers of the peace. There is a
story in Tiverton of one man who went remorsefully mad after his wife's
death, and whose mind dwelt unceasingly on the things he had denied
her. These were not many, yet the sum seemed to him colossal. It piled
the Ossa of his grief. Especially did he writhe under the remembrance of
certain blue dishes she had desired the week before her sudden death;
and one night, driven by an insane impulse to expiate his blindness, he
walked to town, bought them, and placed them in a foolish order about
her grave. It was a puerile, crazy deed, but no one smiled, not even the
little children who heard of it next day, on the way home from school, and
went trudging up there to see. To their stirring minds it seemed a strange
departure from the comfortable order of things, chiefly because their
elders stood about with furtive glances at one another and murmurs of
"Poor creatur'!" But one man, wiser than the rest, "harnessed up," and
went to tell the dead woman's mother, a mile away. Jonas was
"shackled;" he might "do himself a mischief." In the late afternoon, the
guest so summoned walked quietly into the silent house, where Jonas sat
by the window, beating one hand incessantly upon the sill, and staring at
the air. His sister, also, had come; she was frightened, however, and had
betaken herself to the bedroom, to sob. But in walked this little plump,
soft-footed woman, with her banded hair, her benevolent spectacles, and
her atmosphere of calm.
"I guess I'll blaze a fire, Jonas," said she. "You step out an' git me a mite
o' kindlin'."
The air of homely living enwrapped him once again, and mechanically,
with the inertia of old habit, he obeyed. They had a "cup o' tea" together;
and then, when the dishes were washed, and the peaceful twilight began
to settle down upon them like a sifting mist, she drew a little rocking chair
to the window where he sat opposite, and spoke.

 "Jonas," said she, in that still voice which had been harmonized by the
experiences of life, "arter dark, you jest go up an' bring home them blue
dishes. Mary's got an awful lot o' fun in her, an' if she ain't laughin' over
that, I'm beat. Now, Jonas, you do it! Do you s'pose she wants them nice
blue pieces out there through wind an' weather? She'd ruther by half see
'em on the parlor cluzzet shelves; an' if you'll fetch 'em home, I'll scallop
some white paper, jest as she liked, an' we'll set 'em up there."
Jonas wakened a little from his mental swoon. Life seemed warmer, more
tangible, again.
"Law, do go," said the mother soothingly. "She don't want the whole
township tramplin' up there to eye over her chiny. Make her as nervous
as a witch. Here's the ha'-bushel basket, an' some paper to put between
'em. You go, Jonas, an' I'll clear off the shelves."
So Jonas, whether he was tired of guiding the impulses of his own unquiet
mind, or whether he had become a child again, glad to yield to the
maternal, as we all do in our grief, took the basket and went. He stood
by, still like a child, while this comfortable woman put the china on the
shelves, speaking warmly, as she worked, of the pretty curving of the
cups, and her belief that the pitcher was "one you could pour out of." She
stayed on at the house, and Jonas, through his sickness of the mind, lay
back upon her soothing will as a baby lies in its mother's arms. But the
china was never used, even when he had come to his normal estate, and
bought and sold as before. The mother's prescience was too keen for that.
Here in this ground are the ambiguities of life carried over into that other
state, its pathos and its small misunderstandings. This was a muchmarried man whose last spouse had been a triple widow. Even to him the
situation proved mathematically complex, and the sumptuous stone to
her memory bears the dizzying legend that "Enoch Nudd who erects this
stone is her fourth husband and his fifth wife." Perhaps it was the
exigencies of space which brought about this amazing elision; but surely,
in its very apparent intention, there is only a modest pride. For
indubitably the much-married may plume themselves upon being also the
widely sought. If it is the crown of sex to be desired, here you have it,

 under seal of the civil bond. No baseless, windy boasting that "I might an
if I would!" Nay, here be the marriage ties to testify.
In this pleasant, weedy corner is a little white stone, not so long erected.
"I shall arise in thine image," runs the inscription; and reading it, you
shall remember that the dust within belonged to a little hunchback, who
played the fiddle divinely, and had beseeching eyes. With that cry he
escaped from the marred conditions of the clay. Here, too (for this is a
sort of bachelor nook), is the grave of a man whom we unconsciously
thrust into a permanent masquerade. Years and years ago he broke into a
house,--an unknown felony in our quiet limits,--and was incontinently
shot. The burglar lost his arm, and went about at first under a cloud of
disgrace and horror, which became, with healing of the public conscience,
a veil of sympathy. After his brief imprisonment indoors, during the
healing of the mutilated stump, he came forth among us again, a man
sadder and wiser in that he had learned how slow and sure may be the
road to wealth. He had sown his wild oats in one night's foolish work, and
now he settled down to doing such odd jobs as he might with one hand.
We got accustomed to his loss. Those of us who were children when it
happened never really discovered that it was disgrace at all; we called it
misfortune, and no one said us nay. Then one day it occurred to us that
he must have been shot "in the war," and so, all unwittingly to himself,
the silent man became a hero. We accepted him. He was part of our
poetic time, and when he died, we held him still in remembrance among
those who fell worthily. When Decoration Day was first observed in
Tiverton, one of us thought of him, and dropped some apple blossoms on
his grave; and so it had its posy like the rest, although it bore no flag. It
was the doctor who set us right there. "I wouldn't do that," he said,
withholding the hand of one unthinking child; and she took back her flag.
But she left the blossoms, and, being fond of precedent, we still do the
same; unless we stop to think, we know not why. You may say there is
here some perfidy to the republic and the honored dead, or at least some
laxity of morals. We are lax, indeed, but possibly that is why we are so
kind. We are not willing to "hurt folks' feelings" even when they have
migrated to another star; and a flower more or less from the overplus
given to men who made the greater choice will do no harm, tossed to one
whose soul may be sitting, like Lazarus, at their riches' gate.

 But of all these fleeting legends made to, hold the soul a moment on its
way, and keep it here in fickle permanence, one is more dramatic than
all, more charged with power and pathos. Years ago there came into
Tiverton an unknown man, very handsome, showing the marks of high
breeding, and yet in his bearing strangely solitary and remote. He wore a
cloak, and had a foreign look. He came walking into the town one night,
with dust upon his shoes, and we judged that he had been traveling a
long time. He had the appearance of one who was not nearly at his
journey's end, and would pass through the village, continuing on a longer
way. He glanced at no one, but we all stared at him. He seemed, though
we had not the words to put it so, an exiled prince. He went straight
through Tiverton Street until he came to the parsonage; and something
about it (perhaps its garden, hot with flowers, larkspur, coreopsis, and
the rest) detained his eye, and he walked in. Next day the old doctor was
there also with his little black case, but we were none the wiser for that;
for the old doctor was of the sort who intrench themselves in a
professional reserve. You might draw up beside the road to question him,
but you could as well deter the course of nature. He would give the roan a
flick, and his sulky would flash by.
"What's the matter with so-and-so?" would ask a mousing neighbor.
"He's sick," ran the laconic reply.
"Goin' to die?" one daring querist ventured further.
"Some time," said the doctor.
But though he assumed a right to combat thus the outer world, no one
was gentler with a sick man or with those about him in their grief. To the
latter he would speak; but he used to say he drew his line at second
cousins.
Into his hands and the true old parson's fell the stranger's confidence, if
confidence it were. He may have died solitary and unexplained; but no
matter what he said, his story was safe. In a week he was carried out for
burial; and so solemn was the parson's manner as he spoke a brief
service over him, so thrilling his enunciation of the words "our brother,"

 that we dared not even ask what else he should be called. And we never
knew. The headstone, set up by the parson, bore the words "Peccator
Maximus." For a long time we thought they made the stranger's name,
and, judged that he must have been a foreigner; but a new
schoolmistress taught us otherwise. It was Latin, she said, and it meant
"the chiefest among sinners." When that report flew round, the parson
got wind of it, and then, in the pulpit one morning, he announced that he
felt it necessary to say that the words had been used "at our brother's
request," and that it was his own decision to write below them, "For this
cause came I into the world."
We have accepted the stranger as we accept many things in Tiverton.
Parson and doctor kept his secret well. He is quite safe from our
questioning; but for years I expected a lady, always young and full of
grief, to seek out his grave and shrive him with her tears. She will not
appear now, unless she come as an old, old woman, to lie beside him. It
is too late.
One more record of our vanished time,--this full of poesy only, and the
pathos of farewell. It was not the aged and heartsick alone who lay down
here to rest We have been no more fortunate than others. Youth and
beauty came also, and returned no more. This, where the white rose-bush
grows untended, was the young daughter of a squire in far-off days: too
young to have known the pangs of love or the sweet desire of Death, save
that, in primrose time, he always paints himself so fair. I have thought
the inscription must have been borrowed from another grave, in some
yard shaded by yews and silent under the cawing of the rooks; perhaps,
from its stiffness, translated from a stately Latin verse. This it is,
snatched not too soon from oblivion; for a few more years will wear it
quite away:--

"Here lies the purple flower of a maid
Having to envious Death due tribute paid.
Her sudden Loss her Parents did lament,
And all her Friends with grief their hearts did Rent.
Life's short. Your wicked Lives amend with care,
For Mortals know we Dust and Shadows are."

 "The purple flower of a maid!" All the blossomy sweetness, the fragrant
lamenting of Lycidas, lies in that one line. Alas, poor love-lies-bleeding!
And yet not poor according to the barren pity we accord the dead, but
dowered with another youth set like a crown upon the unstained front of
this. Not going with sparse blossoms ripened or decayed, but heaped with
buds and dripping over in perfume. She seems so sweet in her still
loveliness, the empty promise of her balmy spring, that for a moment fain
are you to snatch her back into the pageant of your day. Reading that
phrase, you feel the earth is poorer for her loss. And yet not so, since the
world holds other greater worlds as well. Elsewhere she may have grown
to age and stature; but here she lives yet in beauteous permanence,--as
true a part of youth and joy and rapture as the immortal figures on the
Grecian Urn. While she was but a flying phantom on the frieze of time,
Death fixed her there forever,--a haunting spirit in perennial bliss.

 
About Love
A short story by Anton Chekhov

AT lunch next day there were very nice pies, crayfish, and mutton cutlets;
and while we were eating, Nikanor, the cook, came up to ask what the
visitors would like for dinner. He was a man of medium height, with a
puffy face and little eyes; he was close-shaven, and it looked as though
his moustaches had not been shaved, but had been pulled out by the
roots. Alehin told us that the beautiful Pelagea was in love with this cook.
As he drank and was of a violent character, she did not want to marry
him, but was willing to live with him without. He was very devout, and his
religious convictions would not allow him to "live in sin"; he insisted on
her marrying him, and would consent to nothing else, and when he was
drunk he used to abuse her and even beat her. Whenever he got drunk
she used to hide upstairs and sob, and on such occasions Alehin and the
servants stayed in the house to be ready to defend her in case of
necessity.
We began talking about love.
"How love is born," said Alehin, "why Pelagea does not love somebody
more like herself in her spiritual and external qualities, and why she fell in
love with Nikanor, that ugly snout -- we all call him 'The Snout' -- how far
questions of personal happiness are of consequence in love -- all that is
known; one can take what view one likes of it. So far only one
incontestable truth has been uttered about love: 'This is a great mystery.'
Everything else that has been written or said about love is not a
conclusion, but only a statement of questions which have remained
unanswered. The explanation which would seem to fit one case does not
apply in a dozen others, and the very best thing, to my mind, would be to
explain every case individually without attempting to generalize. We
ought, as the doctors say, to individualize each case."
"Perfectly true," Burkin assented.

 "We Russians of the educated class have a partiality for these questions
that remain unanswered. Love is usually poeticized, decorated with roses,
nightingales; we Russians decorate our loves with these momentous
questions, and select the most uninteresting of them, too. In Moscow,
when I was a student, I had a friend who shared my life, a charming lady,
and every time I took her in my arms she was thinking what I would allow
her a month for housekeeping and what was the price of beef a pound. In
the same way, when we are in love we are never tired of asking ourselves
questi ons: whether it is honourable or dishonourable, sensible or stupid,
what this love is leading up to, and so on. Whether it is a good thing or
not I don't know, but that it is in the way, unsatisfactory, and irritating, I
do know."
It looked as though he wanted to tell some story. People who lead a
solitary existence always have something in their hearts which they are
eager to talk about. In town bachelors visit the baths and the restaurants
on purpose to talk, and sometimes tell the most interesting things to bath
attendants and waiters; in the country, as a rule, they unbosom
themselves to their guests. Now from the window we could see a grey
sky, trees drenched in the rain; in such weather we could go nowhere,
and there was nothing for us to do but to tell stories and to listen.
"I have lived at Sofino and been farming for a long time," Alehin began,
"ever since I left the University. I am an idle gentleman by education, a
studious person by disposition; but there was a big debt owing on the
estate when I came here, and as my father was in debt partly because he
had spent so much on my education, I resolved not to go away, but to
work till I paid off the debt. I made up my mind to this and set to work,
not, I must confess, without some repugnance. The land here does not
yield much, and if one is not to farm at a loss one must employ serf
labour or hired labourers, which is almost the same thing, or put it on a
peasant footing -- that is, work the fields oneself and with one's family.
There is no middle path. But in those days I did not go into such
subtleties. I did not leave a clod of earth unturned; I gathered together all
the peasants, men and women, from the neighbouring villages; the work
went on at a tremendous pace. I myself ploughed and sowed and reaped,
and was bored doing it, and frowned with disgust, like a village cat driven
by hunger to eat cucumbers in the kitchen-garden. My body ached, and I

 slept as I walked. At first it seemed to me that I could easily reconcile this
life of toil with my cultured habits; to do so, I thought, all that is
necessary is to maintain a certain external order in life. I established
myself upstairs here in the best rooms, and ordered them to bring me
there coffee and liquor after lunch and dinner, and when I went to bed I
read every night the _Yyesnik Evropi_. But one day our priest, Father
Ivan, came and drank up all my liquor at one sitting; and the _Yyesnik
Evropi_ went to the priest's daughters; as in the summer, especially at
the haymaking, I did not succeed in getting to my bed at all, and slept in
the sledge in the barn, or somewhere in the forester's lodge, what chance
was there of reading? Little by little I moved downstairs, began dining in
the servants' kitchen, and of my former luxury nothing is left but the
servants who were in my father's service, and whom it would be painful
to turn away.__
"In the first years I was elected here an honourary justice of the peace. I
used to have to go to the town and take part in the sessions of the
congress and of the circuit court, and this was a pleasant change for me.
When you live here for two or three months without a break, especially in
the winter, you begin at last to pine for a black coat. And in the circuit
court there were frock-coats, and uniforms, and dress-coats, too, all
lawyers, men who have received a general education; I had some one to
talk to. After sleeping in the sledge and dining in the kitchen, to sit in an
arm-chair in clean linen, in thin boots, with a chain on one's waistcoat, is
such luxury!
"I received a warm welcome in the town. I made friends eagerly. And of
all my acquaintanceships the most intimate and, to tell the truth, the
most agreeable to me was my acquaintance with Luganovitch, the vicepresident of the circuit court. You both know him: a most charming
personality. It all happened just after a celebrated case of incendiarism;
the preliminary investigation lasted two days; we were exhausted.
Luganovitch looked at me and said:
" 'Look here, come round to dinner with me.'
"This was unexpected, as I knew Luganovitch very little, only officially,
and I had never been to his house. I only just went to my hotel room to

 change and went off to dinner. And here it was my lot to meet Anna
Alexyevna, Luganovitch's wife. At that time she was still very young, not
more than twenty-two, and her first baby had been born just six months
before. It is all a thing of the past; and now I should find it difficult to
define what there was so exceptional in her, what it was in her attracted
me so much; at the time, at dinner, it was all perfectly clear to me. I saw
a lovely young, good, intelligent, fascinating woman, such as I had never
met before; and I felt her at once some one close and already familiar, as
though that face, those cordial, intelligent eyes, I had seen somewhere in
my childhood, in the album which lay on my mother's chest of drawers.
"Four Jews were charged with being incendiaries, were regarded as a
gang of robbers, and, to my mind, quite groundlessly. At dinner I was
very much excited, I was uncomfortable, and I don't know what I said,
but Anna Alexyevna kept shaking her head and saying to her husband:
" 'Dmitry, how is this?'
"Luganovitch is a good-natured man, one of those simple-hearted people
who firmly maintain the opinion that once a man is charged before a court
he is guilty, and to express doubt of the correctness of a sentence cannot
be done except in legal form on paper, and not at dinner and in private
conversation.
" 'You and I did not set fire to the place,' he said softly, 'and you see we
are not condemned, and not in prison.'
"And both husband and wife tried to make me eat and drink as much as
possible. From some trifling details, from the way they made the coffee
together, for instance, and from the way they understood each other at
half a word, I could gather that they lived in harmony and comfort, and
that they were glad of a visitor. After dinner they played a duet on the
piano; then it got dark, and I went home. That was at the beginning of
spring.
"After that I spent the whole summer at Sofino without a break, and I had
no time to think of the town, either, but the memory of the graceful fair-

 haired woman remained in my mind all those days; I did not think of her,
but it was as though her light shadow were lying on my heart.
"In the late autumn there was a theatrical performance for some
charitable object in the town. I went into the governor's box (I was
invited to go there in the interval); I looked, and there was Anna
Alexyevna sitting beside the governor's wife; and again the same
irresistible, thrilling impression of beauty and sweet, caressing eyes, and
again the same feeling of nearness. We sat side by side, then went to the
foyer.
" 'You've grown thinner,' she said; 'have you been ill?'__
" 'Yes, I've had rheumatism in my shoulder, and in rainy weather I can't
sleep.'
" 'You look dispirited. In the spring, when you came to dinner, you were
younger, more confident. You were full of eagerness, and talked a great
deal then; you were very interesting, and I really must confess I was a
little carried away by you. For some reason you often came back to my
memory during the summer, and when I was getting ready for the
theatre today I thought I should see you.'
"And she laughed.
" 'But you look dispirited today,' she repeated; 'it makes you seem older.'
"The next day I lunched at the Luganovitchs'. After lunch they drove out
to their summer villa, in order to make arrangements there for the winter,
and I went with them. I returned with them to the town, and at midnight
drank tea with them in quiet domestic surroundings, while the fire
glowed, and the young mother kept going to see if her baby girl was
asleep. And after that, every time I went to town I never failed to visit the
Luganovitchs. They grew used to me, and I grew used to them. As a rule
I went in unannounced, as though I were one of the family.
" 'Who is there?' I would hear from a faraway room, in the drawling voice
that seemed to me so lovely.

 " 'It is Pavel Konstantinovitch,' answered the maid or the nurse.
"Anna Alexyevna would come out to me with an anxious face, and would
ask every time:
" 'Why is it so long since you have been? Has anything happened?'
"Her eyes, the elegant refined hand she gave me, her indoor dress, the
way she did her hair, her voice, her step, always produced the same
impression on me of something new and extraordinary in my life, and
very important. We talked together for hours, were silent, thinking each
our own thoughts, or she played for hours to me on the piano. If there
were no one at home I stayed and waited, talked to the nurse, played
with the child, or lay on the sofa in the study and read; and when Anna
Alexyevna came back I met her in the hall, took all her parcels from her,
and for some reason I carried those parcels every time with as much love,
with as much solemnity, as a boy.
"There is a proverb that if a peasant woman has no troubles she will buy
a pig. The Luganovitchs had no troubles, so they made friends with me. If
I did not come to the town I must be ill or something must have
happened to me, and both of them were extremely anxious. They were
worried that I, an educated man with a knowledge of languages, should,
instead of devoting myself to science or literary work, live in the country,
rush round like a squirrel in a rage, work hard with never a penny to show
for it. They fancied that I was unhappy, and that I only talked, laughed,
and ate to conceal my sufferings, and even at cheerful moments when I
felt happy I was aware of their searching eyes fixed upon me. They were
particularly touching when I really was depressed, when I was being
worried by some creditor or had not money enough to pay interest on the
proper day. The two of them, husband and wife, would whisper together
at the window; then he would come to me and say with a grave face:
" 'If you really are in need of money at the moment, Pavel
Konstantinovitch, my wife and I beg you not to hesitate to borrow from
us.'

 "And he would blush to his ears with emotion. And it would happen that,
after whispering in the same way at the window, he would come up to
me, with red ears, and say:
" 'My wife and I earnestly beg you to accept this present.'
"And he would give me studs, a cigar-case, or a lamp, and I would send
them game, butter, and flowers from the country. They both, by the way,
had considerable means of their own. In early days I often borrowed
money, and was not very particular about it -- borrowed wherever I could
-- but nothing in the world would have induced me to borrow from the
Luganovitchs. But why talk of it?
"I was unhappy. At home, in the fields, in the barn, I thought of her; I
tried to understand the mystery of a beautiful, intelligent young woman's
marrying some one so uninteresting, almost an old man (her husband
was over forty), and having children by him; to understand the mystery
of this uninteresting, good, simple-hearted man, who argued with such
wearisome good sense, at balls and evening parties kept near the more
solid people, looking listless and superfluous, with a submissive,
uninterested expression, as though he had been brought there for sale,
who yet believed in his right to be happy, to have children by her; and I
kept trying to understand why she had met him first and not me, and why
such a terrible mistake in our lives need have happened.
"And when I went to the town I saw every time from her eyes that she
was expecting me, and she would confess to me herself that she had had
a peculiar feeling all that day and had guessed that I should come. We
talked a long time, and were silent, yet we did not confess our love to
each other, but timidly and jealously concealed it. We were afraid of
everything that might reveal our secret to ourselves. I loved her tenderly,
deeply, but I reflected and kept asking myself what our love could lead to
if we had not the strength to fight against it. It seemed to be incredible
that my gentle, sad love could all at once coarsely break up the even
tenor of the life of her husband, her children, and all the household in
which I was so loved and trusted. Would it be honourable? She would go
away with me, but where? Where could I take her? It would have been a
different matter if I had had a beautiful, interesting life -- if, for instance,

 I had been struggling for the emancipation of my country, or had been a
celebrated man of science, an artist or a painter; but as it was it would
mean taking her from one everyday humdrum life to another as humdrum
or perhaps more so. And how long would our happiness last? What would
happen to her in case I was ill, in case I died, or if we simply grew cold to
one another?
"And she apparently reasoned in the same way. She thought of her
husband, her children, and of her mother, who loved the husband like a
son. If she abandoned herself to her feelings she would have to lie, or
else to tell the truth, and in her position either would have been equally
terrible and inconvenient. And she was tormented by the question
whether her love would bring me happiness -- would she not complicate
my life, which, as it was, was hard enough and full of all sorts of trouble?
She fancied she was not young enough for me, that she was not
industrious nor energetic enough to begin a new life, and she often talked
to her husband of the importance of my marrying a girl of intelligence and
merit who would be a capable housewife and a help to me -- and she
would immediately add that it would be difficult to find such a girl in the
whole town.
"Meanwhile the years were passing. Anna Alexyevna already had two
children. When I arrived at the Luganovitchs' the servants smiled
cordially, the children shouted that Uncle Pavel Konstantinovitch had
come, and hung on my neck; every one was overjoyed. They did not
understand what was passing in my soul, and thought that I, too, was
happy. Every one looked on me as a noble being. And grown-ups and
children alike felt that a noble being was walking about their rooms, and
that gave a peculiar charm to their manner towards me, as though in my
presence their life, too, was purer and more beautiful. Anna Alexyevna
and I used to go to the theatre together, always walking there; we used
to sit side by side in the stalls, our shoulders touching. I would take the
opera-glass from her hands without a word, and feel at that minute that
she was near me, that she was mine, that we could not live without each
other; but by some strange misunderstanding, when we came out of the
theatre we always said good-bye and parted as though we were
strangers. Goodness knows what people were saying about us in the town
already, but there was not a word of truth in it all!

 "In the latter years Anna Alexyevna took to going away for frequent visits
to her mother or to her sister; she began to suffer from low spirits, she
began to recognize that her life was spoilt and unsatisfied, and at times
she did not care to see her husband nor her children. She was already
being treated for neurasthenia.
"We were silent and still silent, and in the presence of outsiders she
displayed a strange irritation in regard to me; whatever I talked about,
she disagreed with me, and if I had an argument she sided with my
opponent. If I dropped anything, she would say coldly:
" 'I congratulate you.'
"If I forgot to take the opera-glass when we were going to the theatre,
she would say afterwards:
" 'I knew you would forget it.'
"Luckily or unluckily, there is nothing in our lives that does not end sooner
or later. The time of parting came, as Luganovitch was appointed
president in one of the western provinces. They had to sell their furniture,
their horses, their summer villa. When they drove out to the villa, and
afterwards looked back as they were going away, to look for the last time
at the garden, at the green roof, every one was sad, and I realized that I
had to say goodbye not only to the villa. It was arranged that at the end
of August we should see Anna Alexyevna off to the Crimea, where the
doctors were sending her, and that a little later Luganovitch and the
children would set off for the western province.
"We were a great crowd to see Anna Alexye vna off. When she had said
good-bye to her husband and her children and there was only a minute
left before the third bell, I ran into her compartment to put a basket,
which she had almost forgotten, on the rack, and I had to say good-bye.
When our eyes met in the compartment our spiritual fortitude deserted us
both; I took her in my arms, she pressed her face to my breast, and tears
flowed from her eyes. Kissing her face, her shoulders, her hands wet with
tears -- oh, how unhappy we were! -- I confessed my love for her, and

 with a burning pain in my heart I realized how unnecessary, how petty,
and how deceptive all that had hindered us from loving was. I understood
that when you love you must either, in your reasonings about that love,
start from what is highest, from what is more important than happiness
or unhappiness, sin or virtue in their accepted meaning, or you must not
reason at all.
"I kissed her for the last time, pressed her hand, and parted for ever. The
train had already started. I went into the next compartment -- it was
empty -- and until I reached the next station I sat there crying. Then I
walked home to Sofino. . . ."
While Alehin was telling his story, the rain left off and the sun came out.
Burkin and Ivan Ivanovitch went out on the balcony, from which there
was a beautiful view over the garden and the mill-pond, which was
shining now in the sunshine like a mirror. They admired it, and at the
same time they were sorry that this man with the kind, clever eyes, who
had told them this story with such genuine feeling, should be rushing
round and round this huge estate like a squirrel on a wheel instead of
devoting himself to science or something else which would have made his
life more pleasant; and they thought what a sorrowful face Anna
Alexyevna must have had when he said good-bye to her in the railwaycarriage and kissed her face and shoulders. Both of them had met her in
the town, and Burkin knew her and thought her beautiful.

 
An Actors End
A short story by Anton Chekhov

SHTCHIPTSOV, the "heavy father" and "good-hearted simpleton," a tall
and thick-set old man, not so much distinguished by his talents as an
actor as by his exceptional physical strength, had a desperate quarrel
with the manager during the performance, and just when the storm of
words was at its height felt as though something had snapped in his
chest. Zhukov, the manager, as a rule began at the end of every heated
discussion to laugh hysterically and to fall into a swoon; on this occasion,
however, Shtchiptsov did not remain for this climax, but hurried home.
The high words and the sensation of something ruptured in his chest so
agitated him as he left the theatre that he forgot to wash off his paint,
and did nothing but take off his beard.
When he reached his hotel room, Shtchiptsov spent a long time pacing up
and down, then sat down on the bed, propped his head on his fists, and
sank into thought. He sat like that without stirring or uttering a sound till
two o'clock the next afternoon, when Sigaev, the comic man, walked into
his room.
"Why is it you did not come to the rehearsal, Booby Ivanitch?" the comic
man began, panting and filling the room with fumes of vodka. "Where
have you been?"
Shtchiptsov made no answer, but simply stared at the comic man with
lustreless eyes, under which there were smudges of paint.
"You might at least have washed your phiz!" Sigaev went on. "You are a
disgraceful sight! Have you been boozing, or . . . are you ill, or what? But
why don't you speak? I am asking you: are you ill?"
Shtchiptsov did not speak. In spite of the paint on his face, the comic
man could not help noticing his striking pallor, the drops of sweat on his
forehead, and the twitching of his lips. His hands and feet were trembling
too, and the whole huge figure of the "good-natured simpleton" looked

 somehow crushed and flattened. The comic man took a rapid glance
round the room, but saw neither bottle nor flask nor any other suspicious
vessel.
"I say, Mishutka, you know you are ill!" he said in a flutter. "Strike me
dead, you are ill! You don't look yourself!"
Shtchiptsov remained silent and stared disconsolately at the floor.
"You must have caught cold," said Sigaev, taking him by the hand. "Oh,
dear, how hot your hands are! What's the trouble?"
"I wa-ant to go home," muttered Shtchiptsov.
"But you are at home now, aren't you?"
"No. . . . To Vyazma. . . ."
"Oh, my, anywhere else! It would take you three years to get to your
Vyazma. . . . What? do you want to go and see your daddy and mummy?
I'll be bound, they've kicked the bucket years ago, and you won't find
their graves. . . ."
"My ho-ome's there."
"Come, it's no good giving way to the dismal dumps. These neurotic
feelings are the limit, old man. You must get well, for you have to play
Mitka in 'The Terrible Tsar' to-morrow. There is nobody else to do it. Drink
something hot and take some castor-oil? Have you got the money for
some castor-oil? Or, stay, I'll run and buy some."
The comic man fumbled in his pockets, found a fifteen-kopeck piece, and
ran to the chemist's. A quarter of an hour later he came back.
"Come, drink it," he said, holding the bottle to the "heavy father's"
mouth. "Drink it straight out of the bottle. . . . All at a go! That's the way.
. . . Now nibble at a clove that your very soul mayn't stink of the filthy
stuff."

 The comic man sat a little longer with his sick friend, then kissed him
tenderly, and went away. Towards evening the _jeune premier_, BramaGlinsky, ran in to see Shtchiptsov. The gifted actor was wearing a pair of
prunella boots, had a glove on his left hand, was smoking a cigar, and
even smelt of heliotrope, yet nevertheless he strongly suggested a
traveller cast away in some land in which there were neither baths nor
laundresses nor tailors. . . .
"I hear you are ill?" he said to Shtchiptsov, twirling round on his heel.
"What's wrong with you? What's wrong with you, really? . . ."
Shtchiptsov did not speak nor stir.
"Why don't you speak? Do you feel giddy? Oh well, don't talk, I won't
pester you . . . don't talk. . . ."
Brama-Glinsky (that was his stage name, in his passport he was called
Guskov) walked away to the window, put his hands in his pockets, and
fell to gazing into the street. Before his eyes stretched an immense waste,
bounded by a grey fence beside which ran a perfect forest of last year's
burdocks. Beyond the waste ground was a dark, deserted factory, with
windows boarded up. A belated jackdaw was flying round the chimney.
This dreary, lifeless scene was beginning to be veiled in the dusk of
evening.
"I must go home!" the _jeune premier_ heard.
"Where is home?"
"To Vyazma . . . to my home. . . ."
"It is a thousand miles to Vyazma . . . my boy," sighed Brama-Glinsky,
drumming on the window-pane. "And what do you want to go to Vyazma
for?"
"I want to die there."

 "What next! Now he's dying! He has fallen ill for the first time in his life,
and already he fancies that his last hour is come. . . . No, my boy, no
cholera will carry off a buffalo like you. You'll live to be a hundred. . . .
Where's the pain?"
"There's no pain, but I . . . feel . . ."
"You don't feel anything, it all comes from being too healthy. Your surplus
energy upsets you. You ought to get jolly tight--drink, you know, till your
whole inside is topsy-turvy. Getting drunk is wonderfully restoring. . . .
Do you remember how screwed you were at Rostov on the Don? Good
Lord, the very thought of it is alarming! Sashka and I together could only
just carry in the barrel, and you emptied it alone, and even sent for rum
afterwards. . . . You got so drunk you were catching devils in a sack and
pulled a lamp-post up by the roots. Do you remember? Then you went off
to beat the Greeks. . . ."
Under the influence of these agreeable reminiscences Shtchiptsov's face
brightened a little and his eyes began to shine.
"And do you remember how I beat Savoikin the manager?" he muttered,
raising his head. "But there! I've beaten thirty-three managers in my
time, and I can't remember how many smaller fry. And what managers
they were! Men who would not permit the very winds to touch them! I've
beaten two celebrated authors and one painter!"
"What are you crying for?"
"At Kherson I killed a horse with my fists. And at Taganrog some roughs
fell upon me at night, fifteen of them. I took off their caps and they
followed me, begging: 'Uncle, give us back our caps.' That's how I used to
go on."
"What are you crying for, then, you silly?"
"But now it's all over . . . I feel it. If only I could go to Vyazma!"

 A pause followed. After a silence Shtchiptsov suddenly jumped up and
seized his cap. He looked distraught.
"Good-bye! I am going to Vyazma!" he articulated, staggering.
"And the money for the journey?"
"H'm! . . . I shall go on foot!"
"You are crazy. . . ."
The two men looked at each other, probably because the same thought -of the boundless plains, the unending forests and swamps-- struck both of
them at once.
"Well, I see you have gone off your head," the _jeune premier_
commented. "I'll tell you what, old man. . . . First thing, go to bed, then
drink some brandy and tea to put you into a sweat. And some castor-oil,
of course. Stay, where am I to get some brandy?"
Brama-Glinsky thought a minute, then made up his mind to go to a
shopkeeper called Madame Tsitrinnikov to try and get it from her on tick:
who knows? perhaps the woman would feel for them and let them have it.
The _jeune premier_ went off, and half an hour later returned with a
bottle of brandy and some castor-oil. Shtchiptsov was sitting motionless,
as before, on the bed, gazing dumbly at the floor. He drank the castor-oil
offered him by his friend like an automaton, with no consciousness of
what he was doing. Like an automaton he sat afterwards at the table, and
drank tea and brandy; mechanically he emptied the whole bottle and let
the _jeune premier_ put him to bed. The latter covered him up with a
quilt and an overcoat, advised him to get into a perspiration, and went
away.
The night came on; Shtchiptsov had drunk a great deal of brandy, but he
did not sleep. He lay motionless under the quilt and stared at the dark
ceiling; then, seeing the moon looking in at the window, he turned his
eyes from the ceiling towards the companion of the earth, and lay so with

 open eyes till the morning. At nine o'clock in the morning Zhukov, the
manager, ran in.
"What has put it into your head to be ill, my angel?" he cackled, wrinkling
up his nose. "Aie, aie! A man with your physique has no business to be ill!
For shame, for shame! Do you know, I was quite frightened. 'Can our
conversation have had such an effect on him?' I wondered. My dear soul,
I hope it's not through me you've fallen ill! You know you gave me as
good . . . er . . . And, besides, comrades can never get on without words.
You called me all sorts of names . . . and have gone at me with your fists
too, and yet I am fond of you! Upon my soul, I am. I respect you and am
fond of you! Explain, my angel, why I am so fond of you. You are neither
kith nor kin nor wife, but as soon as I heard you had fallen ill it cut me to
the heart."
Zhukov spent a long time declaring his affection, then fell to kissing the
invalid, and finally was so overcome by his feelings that he began
laughing hysterically, and was even meaning to fall into a swoon, but,
probably remembering that he was not at home nor at the theatre, put off
the swoon to a more convenient opportunity and went away.
Soon after him Adabashev, the tragic actor, a dingy, short-sighted
individual who talked through his nose, made his appearance. . . . For a
long while he looked at Shtchiptsov, for a long while he pondered, and at
last he made a discovery.
"Do you know what, Mifa?" he said, pronouncing through his nose "f"
instead of "sh," and assuming a mysterious expression. "Do you know
what? You ought to have a dose of castor-oil!"
Shtchiptsov was silent. He remained silent, too, a little later as the tragic
actor poured the loathsome oil into his mouth. Two hours later Yevlampy,
or, as the actors for some reason called him, Rigoletto, the hairdresser of
the company, came into the room. He too, like the tragic man, stared at
Shtchiptsov for a long time, then sighed like a steam-engine, and slowly
and deliberately began untying a parcel he had brought with him. In it
there were twenty cups and several little flasks.

 "You should have sent for me and I would have cupped you long ago," he
said, tenderly baring Shtchiptsov's chest. "It is easy to neglect illness."
Thereupon Rigoletto stroked the broad chest of the "heavy father" and
covered it all over with suction cups.
"Yes . . ." he said, as after this operation he packed up his paraphernalia,
crimson with Shtchiptsov's blood. "You should have sent for me, and I
would have come. . . . You needn't trouble about payment. . . . I do it
from sympathy. Where are you to get the money if that idol won't pay
you? Now, please take these drops. They are nice drops! And now you
must have a dose of this castor-oil. It's the real thing. That's right! I hope
it will do you good. Well, now, good-bye. . . ."
Rigoletto took his parcel and withdrew, pleased that he had been of
assistance to a fellow-creature.
The next morning Sigaev, the comic man, going in to see Shtchiptsov,
found him in a terrible condition. He was lying under his coat, breathing in
gasps, while his eyes strayed over the ceiling. In his hands he was
crushing convulsively the crumpled quilt.
"To Vyazma!" he whispered, when he saw the comic man. "To Vyazma."
"Come, I don't like that, old man!" said the comic man, flinging up his
hands. "You see . . . you see . . . you see, old man, that's not the thing!
Excuse me, but . . . it's positively stupid. . . ."
"To go to Vyazma! My God, to Vyazma!"
"I . . . I did not expect it of you," the comic man muttered, utterly
distracted. "What the deuce do you want to collapse like this for? Aie . . .
aie . . . aie! . . . that's not the thing. A giant as tall as a watch-tower, and
crying. Is it the thing for actors to cry?"
"No wife nor children," muttered Shtchiptsov. "I ought not to have gone
for an actor, but have stayed at Vyazma. My life has been wasted,
Semyon! Oh, to be in Vyazma!"

 "Aie . . . aie . . . aie! . . . that's not the thing! You see, it's stupid . . .
contemptible indeed!"
Recovering his composure and setting his feelings in order, Sigaev began
comforting Shtchiptsov, telling him untruly that his comrades had decided
to send him to the Crimea at their expense, and so on, but the sick man
did not listen and kept muttering about Vyazma . . . . At last, with a wave
of his hand, the comic man began talking about Vyazma himself to
comfort the invalid.
"It's a fine town," he said soothingly, "a capital town, old man! It's
famous for its cakes. The cakes are classical, but--between ourselves-h'm!--they are a bit groggy. For a whole week after eating them I was . .
. h'm! . . . But what is fine there is the merchants! They are something
like merchants. When they treat you they do treat you!"
The comic man talked while Shtchiptsov listened in silence and nodded his
head approvingly.
Towards evening he died.

 
The Black Veil
A short story by Charles Dickens

One winter's evening, towards the close of the year 1800, or within a year
or two of that time, a young medical practitioner, recently established in
business, was seated by a cheerful fire in his little parlour, listening to the
wind which was beating the rain in pattering drops against the window, or
rumbling dismally in the chimney. The night was wet and cold; he had
been walking through mud and water the whole day, and was now
comfortably reposing in his dressing-gown and slippers, more than half
asleep and less than half awake, revolving a thousand matters in his
wandering imagination. First, he thought how hard the wind was blowing,
and how the cold, sharp rain would be at that moment beating in his face,
if he were not comfortably housed at home. Then, his mind reverted to
his annual Christmas visit to his native place and dearest friends; he
thought how glad they would all be to see him, and how happy it would
make Rose if he could only tell her that he had found a patient at last,
and hoped to have more, and to come down again, in a few months' time,
and marry her, and take her home to gladden his lonely fireside, and
stimulate him to fresh exertions. Then, he began to wonder when his first
patient would appear, or whether he was destined, by a special
dispensation of Providence, never to have any patients at all; and then,
he thought about Rose again, and dropped to sleep and dreamed about
her, till the tones of her sweet merry voice sounded in his ears, and her
soft tiny hand rested on his shoulder.
There WAS a hand upon his shoulder, but it was neither soft nor tiny; its
owner being a corpulent round-headed boy, who, in consideration of the
sum of one shilling per week and his food, was let out by the parish to
carry medicine and messages. As there was no demand for the medicine,
however, and no necessity for the messages, he usually occupied his
unemployed hours--averaging fourteen a day--in abstracting peppermint
drops, taking animal nourishment, and going to sleep.
'A lady, sir--a lady!' whispered the boy, rousing his master with a shake.

 'What lady?' cried our friend, starting up, not quite certain that his dream
was an illusion, and half expecting that it might be Rose herself.--'What
lady? Where?'
'THERE, sir!' replied the boy, pointing to the glass door leading into the
surgery, with an expression of alarm which the very unusual apparition of
a customer might have tended to excite.
The surgeon looked towards the door, and started himself, for an instant,
on beholding the appearance of his unlooked-for visitor.
It was a singularly tall woman, dressed in deep mourning, and standing
so close to the door that her face almost touched the glass. The upper
part of her figure was carefully muffled in a black shawl, as if for the
purpose of concealment; and her face was shrouded by a thick black veil.
She stood perfectly erect, her figure was drawn up to its full height, and
though the surgeon felt that the eyes beneath the veil were fixed on him,
she stood perfectly motionless, and evinced, by no gesture whatever, the
slightest consciousness of his having turned towards her.
'Do you wish to consult me?' he inquired, with some hesitation, holding
open the door. It opened inwards, and therefore the action did not alter
the position of the figure, which still remained motionless on the same
spot.
She slightly inclined her head, in token of acquiescence.
'Pray walk in,' said the surgeon.
The figure moved a step forward; and then, turning its head in the
direction of the boy--to his infinite horror--appeared to hesitate.
'Leave the room, Tom,' said the young man, addressing the boy, whose
large round eyes had been extended to their utmost width during this
brief interview. 'Draw the curtain, and shut the door.'

 The boy drew a green curtain across the glass part of the door, retired
into the surgery, closed the door after him, and immediately applied one
of his large eyes to the keyhole on the other side.
The surgeon drew a chair to the fire, and motioned the visitor to a seat.
The mysterious figure slowly moved towards it. As the blaze shone upon
the black dress, the surgeon observed that the bottom of it was saturated
with mud and rain.
'You are very wet,' be said.
'I am,' said the stranger, in a low deep voice.
'And you are ill?' added the surgeon, compassionately, for the tone was
that of a person in pain.
'I am,' was the reply--'very ill; not bodily, but mentally. It is not for
myself, or on my own behalf,' continued the stranger, 'that I come to you.
If I laboured under bodily disease, I should not be out, alone, at such an
hour, or on such a night as this; and if I were afflicted with it, twenty-four
hours hence, God knows how gladly I would lie down and pray to die. It is
for another that I beseech your aid, sir. I may be mad to ask it for him--I
think I am; but, night after night, through the long dreary hours of
watching and weeping, the thought has been ever present to my mind;
and though even _I_ see the hopelessness of human assistance availing
him, the bare thought of laying him in his grave without it makes my
blood run cold!' And a shudder, such as the surgeon well knew art could
not produce, trembled through the speaker's frame.
There was a desperate earnestness in this woman's manner, that went to
the young man's heart. He was young in his profession, and had not yet
witnessed enough of the miseries which are daily presented before the
eyes of its members, to have grown comparatively callous to human
suffering.
'If,' he said, rising hastily, 'the person of whom you speak, be in so
hopeless a condition as you describe, not a moment is to be lost. I will go
with you instantly. Why did you not obtain medical advice before?'

 'Because it would have been useless before--because it is useless even
now,' replied the woman, clasping her hands passionately.
The surgeon gazed, for a moment, on the black veil, as if to ascertain the
expression of the features beneath it: its thickness, however, rendered
such a result impossible.
'You ARE ill,' he said, gently, 'although you do not know it. The fever
which has enabled you to bear, without feeling it, the fatigue you have
evidently undergone, is burning within you now. Put that to your lips,' he
continued, pouring out a glass of water- -'compose yourself for a few
moments, and then tell me, as calmly as you can, what the disease of the
patient is, and how long he has been ill. When I know what it is necessary
I should know, to render my visit serviceable to him, I am ready to
accompany you.'
The stranger lifted the glass of water to her mouth, without raising the
veil; put it down again untasted; and burst into tears.
'I know,' she said, sobbing aloud, 'that what I say to you now, seems like
the ravings of fever. I have been told so before, less kindly than by you. I
am not a young woman; and they do say, that as life steals on towards its
final close, the last short remnant, worthless as it may seem to all beside,
is dearer to its possessor than all the years that have gone before,
connected though they be with the recollection of old friends long since
dead, and young ones--children perhaps--who have fallen off from, and
forgotten one as completely as if they had died too. My natural term of
life cannot be many years longer, and should be dear on that account;
but I would lay it down without a sigh--with cheerfulness--with joy--if
what I tell you now, were only false, or imaginary. To- morrow morning
he of whom I speak will be, I KNOW, though I would fain think otherwise,
beyond the reach of human aid; and yet, to- night, though he is in deadly
peril, you must not see, and could not serve, him.'
'I am unwilling to increase your distress,' said the surgeon, after a short
pause, 'by making any comment on what you have just said, or appearing
desirous to investigate a subject you are so anxious to conceal; but there

 is an inconsistency in your statement which I cannot reconcile with
probability. This person is dying to-night, and I cannot see him when my
assistance might possibly avail; you apprehend it will be useless tomorrow, and yet you would have me see him then! If he be, indeed, as
dear to you, as your words and manner would imply, why not try to save
his life before delay and the progress of his disease render it
impracticable?'
'God help me!' exclaimed the woman, weeping bitterly, 'how can I hope
strangers will believe what appears incredible, even to myself? You will
NOT see him then, sir?' she added, rising suddenly.
'I did not say that I declined to see him,' replied the surgeon; 'but I warn
you, that if you persist in this extraordinary procrastination, and the
individual dies, a fearful responsibility rests with you.'
'The responsibility will rest heavily somewhere,' replied the stranger
bitterly. 'Whatever responsibility rests with me, I am content to bear, and
ready to answer.'
'As I incur none,' continued the surgeon, 'by acceding to your request, I
will see him in the morning, if you leave me the address. At what hour
can he be seen?'
'NINE,' replied the stranger.
'You must excuse my pressing these inquiries,' said the surgeon. 'But is
he in your charge now?'
'He is not,' was the rejoinder.
'Then, if I gave you instructions for his treatment through the night, you
could not assist him?'
The woman wept bitterly, as she replied, 'I could not.'
Finding that there was but little prospect of obtaining more information by
prolonging the interview; and anxious to spare the woman's feelings,

 which, subdued at first by a violent effort, were now irrepressible and
most painful to witness; the surgeon repeated his promise of calling in the
morning at the appointed hour. His visitor, after giving him a direction to
an obscure part of Walworth, left the house in the same mysterious
manner in which she had entered it.
It will be readily believed that so extraordinary a visit produced a
considerable impression on the mind of the young surgeon; and that he
speculated a great deal and to very little purpose on the possible
circumstances of the case. In common with the generality of people, he
had often heard and read of singular instances, in which a presentiment
of death, at a particular day, or even minute, had been entertained and
realised. At one moment he was inclined to think that the present might
be such a case; but, then, it occurred to him that all the anecdotes of the
kind he had ever heard, were of persons who had been troubled with a
foreboding of their own death. This woman, however, spoke of another
person--a man; and it was impossible to suppose that a mere dream or
delusion of fancy would induce her to speak of his approaching dissolution
with such terrible certainty as she had spoken. It could not be that the
man was to be murdered in the morning, and that the woman, originally a
consenting party, and bound to secrecy by an oath, had relented, and,
though unable to prevent the commission of some outrage on the victim,
had determined to prevent his death if possible, by the timely
interposition of medical aid? The idea of such things happening within two
miles of the metropolis appeared too wild and preposterous to be
entertained beyond the instant. Then, his original impression that the
woman's intellects were disordered, recurred; and, as it was the only
mode of solving the difficulty with any degree of satisfaction, he
obstinately made up his mind to believe that she was mad. Certain
misgivings upon this point, however, stole upon his thoughts at the time,
and presented themselves again and again through the long dull course of
a sleepless night; during which, in spite of all his efforts to the contrary,
he was unable to banish the black veil from his disturbed imagination.
The back part of Walworth, at its greatest distance from town, is a
straggling miserable place enough, even in these days; but, five- andthirty years ago, the greater portion of it was little better than a dreary
waste, inhabited by a few scattered people of questionable character,

 whose poverty prevented their living in any better neighbourhood, or
whose pursuits and mode of life rendered its solitude desirable. Very
many of the houses which have since sprung up on all sides, were not
built until some years afterwards; and the great majority even of those
which were sprinkled about, at irregular intervals, were of the rudest and
most miserable description.
The appearance of the place through which he walked in the morning,
was not calculated to raise the spirits of the young surgeon, or to dispel
any feeling of anxiety or depression which the singular kind of visit he
was about to make, had awakened. Striking off from the high road, his
way lay across a marshy common, through irregular lanes, with here and
there a ruinous and dismantled cottage fast falling to pieces with decay
and neglect. A stunted tree, or pool of stagnant water, roused into a
sluggish action by the heavy rain of the preceding night, skirted the path
occasionally; and, now and then, a miserable patch of garden-ground,
with a few old boards knocked together for a summer-house, and old
palings imperfectly mended with stakes pilfered from the neighbouring
hedges, bore testimony, at once to the poverty of the inhabitants, and the
little scruple they entertained in appropriating the property of other
people to their own use. Occasionally, a filthy-looking woman would make
her appearance from the door of a dirty house, to empty the contents of
some cooking utensil into the gutter in front, or to scream after a little
slip-shod girl, who had contrived to stagger a few yards from the door
under the weight of a sallow infant almost as big as herself; but, scarcely
anything was stirring around: and so much of the prospect as could be
faintly traced through the cold damp mist which hung heavily over it,
presented a lonely and dreary appearance perfectly in keeping with the
objects we have described.
After plodding wearily through the mud and mire; making many inquiries
for the place to which he had been directed; and receiving as many
contradictory and unsatisfactory replies in return; the young man at
length arrived before the house which had been pointed out to him as the
object of his destination. It was a small low building, one story above the
ground, with even a more desolate and unpromising exterior than any he
had yet passed. An old yellow curtain was closely drawn across the
window up-stairs, and the parlour shutters were closed, but not fastened.

 The house was detached from any other, and, as it stood at an angle of a
narrow lane, there was no other habitation in sight.
When we say that the surgeon hesitated, and walked a few paces beyond
the house, before he could prevail upon himself to lift the knocker, we say
nothing that need raise a smile upon the face of the boldest reader. The
police of London were a very different body in that day; the isolated
position of the suburbs, when the rage for building and the progress of
improvement had not yet begun to connect them with the main body of
the city and its environs, rendered many of them (and this in particular) a
place of resort for the worst and most depraved characters. Even the
streets in the gayest parts of London were imperfectly lighted, at that
time; and such places as these, were left entirely to the mercy of the
moon and stars. The chances of detecting desperate characters, or of
tracing them to their haunts, were thus rendered very few, and their
offences naturally increased in boldness, as the consciousness of
comparative security became the more impressed upon them by daily
experience. Added to these considerations, it must be remembered that
the young man had spent some time in the public hospitals of the
metropolis; and, although neither Burke nor Bishop had then gained a
horrible notoriety, his own observation might have suggested to him how
easily the atrocities to which the former has since given his name, might
be committed. Be this as it may, whatever reflection made him hesitate,
he DID hesitate: but, being a young man of strong mind and great
personal courage, it was only for an instant;--he stepped briskly back and
knocked gently at the door.
A low whispering was audible, immediately afterwards, as if some person
at the end of the passage were conversing stealthily with another on the
landing above. It was succeeded by the noise of a pair of heavy boots
upon the bare floor. The door-chain was softly unfastened; the door
opened; and a tall, ill-favoured man, with black hair, and a face, as the
surgeon often declared afterwards, as pale and haggard, as the
countenance of any dead man he ever saw, presented himself.
'Walk in, sir,' he said in a low tone.

 The surgeon did so, and the man having secured the door again, by the
chain, led the way to a small back parlour at the extremity of the
passage.
'Am I in time?'
'Too soon!' replied the man. The surgeon turned hastily round, with a
gesture of astonishment not unmixed with alarm, which he found it
impossible to repress.
'If you'll step in here, sir,' said the man, who had evidently noticed the
action--'if you'll step in here, sir, you won't be detained five minutes, I
assure you.'
The surgeon at once walked into the room. The man closed the door, and
left him alone.
It was a little cold room, with no other furniture than two deal chairs, and
a table of the same material. A handful of fire, unguarded by any fender,
was burning in the grate, which brought out the damp if it served no
more comfortable purpose, for the unwholesome moisture was stealing
down the walls, in long slug-like tracks. The window, which was broken
and patched in many places, looked into a small enclosed piece of ground,
almost covered with water. Not a sound was to be heard, either within the
house, or without. The young surgeon sat down by the fireplace, to await
the result of his first professional visit.
He had not remained in this position many minutes, when the noise of
some approaching vehicle struck his ear. It stopped; the street-door was
opened; a low talking succeeded, accompanied with a shuffling noise of
footsteps, along the passage and on the stairs, as if two or three men
were engaged in carrying some heavy body to the room above. The
creaking of the stairs, a few seconds afterwards, announced that the newcomers having completed their task, whatever it was, were leaving the
house. The door was again closed, and the former silence was restored.
Another five minutes had elapsed, and the surgeon had resolved to
explore the house, in search of some one to whom he might make his

 errand known, when the room-door opened, and his last night's visitor,
dressed in exactly the same manner, with the veil lowered as before,
motioned him to advance. The singular height of her form, coupled with
the circumstance of her not speaking, caused the idea to pass across his
brain for an instant, that it might be a man disguised in woman's attire.
The hysteric sobs which issued from beneath the veil, and the convulsive
attitude of grief of the whole figure, however, at once exposed the
absurdity of the suspicion; and he hastily followed.
The woman led the way up-stairs to the front room, and paused at the
door, to let him enter first. It was scantily furnished with an old deal box,
a few chairs, and a tent bedstead, without hangings or cross-rails, which
was covered with a patchwork counterpane. The dim light admitted
through the curtain which he had noticed from the outside, rendered the
objects in the room so indistinct, and communicated to all of them so
uniform a hue, that he did not, at first, perceive the object on which his
eye at once rested when the woman rushed frantically past him, and flung
herself on her knees by the bedside.
Stretched upon the bed, closely enveloped in a linen wrapper, and
covered with blankets, lay a human form, stiff and motionless. The head
and face, which were those of a man, were uncovered, save by a bandage
which passed over the head and under the chin. The eyes were closed.
The left arm lay heavily across the bed, and the woman held the passive
hand.
The surgeon gently pushed the woman aside, and took the hand in his.
'My God!' he exclaimed, letting it fall involuntarily--'the man is dead!'
The woman started to her feet and beat her hands together.
'Oh! don't say so, sir,' she exclaimed, with a burst of passion, amounting
almost to frenzy. 'Oh! don't say so, sir! I can't bear it! Men have been
brought to life, before, when unskilful people have given them up for lost;
and men have died, who might have been restored, if proper means had
been resorted to. Don't let him lie here, sir, without one effort to save
him! This very moment life may be passing away. Do try, sir,--do, for

 Heaven's sake!'--And while speaking, she hurriedly chafed, first the
forehead, and then the breast, of the senseless form before her; and
then, wildly beat the cold hands, which, when she ceased to hold them,
fell listlessly and heavily back on the coverlet.
'It is of no use, my good woman,' said the surgeon, soothingly, as he
withdrew his hand from the man's breast. 'Stay--undraw that curtain!'
'Why?' said the woman, starting up.
'Undraw that curtain!' repeated the surgeon in an agitated tone.
'I darkened the room on purpose,' said the woman, throwing herself
before him as he rose to undraw it.--'Oh! sir, have pity on me! If it can be
of no use, and he is really dead, do not expose that form to other eyes
than mine!'
'This man died no natural or easy death,' said the surgeon. 'I MUST see
the body!' With a motion so sudden, that the woman hardly knew that he
had slipped from beside her, he tore open the curtain, admitted the full
light of day, and returned to the bedside.
'There has been violence here,' he said, pointing towards the body, and
gazing intently on the face, from which the black veil was now, for the
first time, removed. In the excitement of a minute before, the female had
thrown off the bonnet and veil, and now stood with her eyes fixed upon
him. Her features were those of a woman about fifty, who had once been
handsome. Sorrow and weeping had left traces upon them which not time
itself would ever have produced without their aid; her face was deadly
pale; and there was a nervous contortion of the lip, and an unnatural fire
in her eye, which showed too plainly that her bodily and mental powers
had nearly sunk, beneath an accumulation of misery.
'There has been violence here,' said the surgeon, preserving his searching
glance.
'There has!' replied the woman.

 'This man has been murdered.'
'That I call God to witness he has,' said the woman, passionately;
'pitilessly, inhumanly murdered!'
'By whom?' said the surgeon, seizing the woman by the arm.
'Look at the butchers' marks, and then ask me!' she replied.
The surgeon turned his face towards the bed, and bent over the body
which now lay full in the light of the window. The throat was swollen, and
a livid mark encircled it. The truth flashed suddenly upon him.
'This is one of the men who were hanged this morning!' he exclaimed,
turning away with a shudder.
'It is,' replied the woman, with a cold, unmeaning stare.
'Who was he?' inquired the surgeon.
'MY SON,' rejoined the woman; and fell senseless at his feet.
It was true. A companion, equally guilty with himself, had been acquitted
for want of evidence; and this man had been left for death, and executed.
To recount the circumstances of the case, at this distant period, must be
unnecessary, and might give pain to some persons still alive. The history
was an every-day one. The mother was a widow without friends or
money, and had denied herself necessaries to bestow them on her orphan
boy. That boy, unmindful of her prayers, and forgetful of the sufferings
she had endured for him--incessant anxiety of mind, and voluntary
starvation of body-- had plunged into a career of dissipation and crime.
And this was the result; his own death by the hangman's hands, and his
mother's shame, and incurable insanity.
For many years after this occurrence, and when profitable and arduous
avocations would have led many men to forget that such a miserable
being existed, the young surgeon was a daily visitor at the side of the
harmless mad woman; not only soothing her by his presence and

 kindness, but alleviating the rigour of her condition by pecuniary
donations for her comfort and support, bestowed with no sparing hand. In
the transient gleam of recollection and consciousness which preceded her
death, a prayer for his welfare and protection, as fervent as mortal ever
breathed, rose from the lips of this poor friendless creature. That prayer
flew to Heaven, and was heard. The blessings he was instrumental in
conferring, have been repaid to him a thousand-fold; but, amid all the
honours of rank and station which have since been heaped upon him, and
which he has so well earned, he can have no reminiscence more
gratifying to his heart than that connected with The Black Veil.

 
The Avenger
A short story by Thomas de Quincey

"Why callest thou me murderer, and not rather the wrath of God burning
after the steps of the oppressor, and cleansing the earth when it is wet
with blood?"
That series of terrific events by which our quiet city and university in the
northeastern quarter of Germany were convulsed during the year 1816,
has in itself, and considered merely as a blind movement of human tigerpassion ranging unchained among men, something too memorable to be
forgotten or left without its own separate record; but the moral lesson
impressed by these events is yet more memorable, and deserves the
deep attention of coming generations in their struggle after human
improvement, not merely in its own limited field of interest directly
awakened, but in all analogous fields of interest; as in fact already, and
more than once, in connection with these very events, this lesson has
obtained the effectual attention of Christian kings and princes assembled
in congress. No tragedy, indeed, among all the sad ones by which the
charities of the human heart or of the fireside have ever been outraged,
can better merit a separate chapter in the private history of German
manners or social life than this unparalleled case. And, on the other hand,
no one can put in a better claim to be the historian than myself.
I was at the time, and still am, a professor in that city and university
which had the melancholy distinction of being its theater. I knew
familiarly all the parties who were concerned in it, either as sufferers or
as agents. I was present from first to last, and watched the whole course
of the mysterious storm which fell upon our devoted city in a strength like
that of a West Indian hurricane, and which did seriously threaten at one
time to depopulate our university, through the dark suspicions which
settled upon its members, and the natural reaction of generous
indignation in repelling them; while the city in its more stationary and
native classes would very soon have manifested THEIR awful sense of
things, of the hideous insecurity for life, and of the unfathomable dangers
which had undermined their hearths below their very feet, by sacrificing,

 whenever circumstances allowed them, their houses and beautiful
gardens in exchange for days uncursed by panic, and nights unpolluted by
blood. Nothing, I can take upon myself to assert, was left undone of all
that human foresight could suggest, or human ingenuity could
accomplish. But observe the melancholy result: the more certain did
these arrangements strike people as remedies for the evil, so much the
more effectually did they aid the terror, but, above all, the awe, the sense
of mystery, when ten cases of total extermination, applied to separate
households, had occurred, in every one of which these precautionary aids
had failed to yield the slightest assistance. The horror, the perfect frenzy
of fear, which seized upon the town after that experience, baffles all
attempt at description. Had these various contrivances failed merely in
some human and intelligible way, as by bringing the aid too tardily-- still,
in such cases, though the danger would no less have been evidently
deepened, nobody would have felt any further mystery than what, from
the very first, rested upon the persons and the motives of the murderers.
But, as it was, when, in ten separate cases of exterminating carnage, the
astounded police, after an examination the most searching, pursued from
day to day, and almost exhausting the patience by the minuteness of the
investigation, had finally pronounced that no attempt apparently had been
made to benefit by any of the signals preconcerted, that no footstep
apparently had moved in that direction--then, and after that result, a
blind misery of fear fell upon the population, so much the worse than any
anguish of a beleaguered city that is awaiting the storming fury of a
victorious enemy, by how much the shadowy, the uncertain, the infinite,
is at all times more potent in mastering the mind than a danger that is
known, measurable, palpable, and human. The very police, instead of
offering protection or encouragement, were seized with terror for
themselves. And the general feeling, as it was described to me by a grave
citizen whom I met in a morning walk (for the overmastering sense of a
public calamity broke down every barrier of reserve, and all men talked
freely to all men in the streets, as they would have done during the
rockings of an earthquake), was, even among the boldest, like that which
sometimes takes possession of the mind in dreams--when one feels
oneself sleeping alone, utterly divided from all call or hearing of friends,
doors open that should be shut, or unlocked that should be triply secured,
the very walls gone, barriers swallowed up by unknown abysses, nothing
around one but frail curtains, and a world of illimitable night, whisperings

 at a distance, correspondence going on between darkness and darkness,
like one deep calling to another, and the dreamer's own heart the center
from which the whole network of this unimaginable chaos radiates, by
means of which the blank PRIVATIONS of silence and darkness become
powers the most POSITIVE and awful.
Agencies of fear, as of any other passion, and, above all, of passion felt in
communion with thousands, and in which the heart beats in conscious
sympathy with an entire city, through all its regions of high and low,
young and old, strong and weak; such agencies avail to raise and
transfigure the natures of men; mean minds become elevated; dull men
become eloquent; and when matters came to this crisis, the public
feeling, as made known by voice, gesture, manner, or words, was such
that no stranger could represent it to his fancy. In that respect, therefore,
I had an advantage, being upon the spot through the whole course of the
affair, for giving a faithful narrative; as I had still more eminently, from
the sort of central station which I occupied, with respect to all the
movements of the case. I may add that I had another advantage, not
possessed, or not in the same degree, by any other inhabitant of the
town. I was personally acquainted with every family of the slightest
account belonging to the resident population; whether among the old
local gentry, or the new settlers whom the late wars had driven to take
refuge within our walls.
It was in September, 1815, that I received a letter from the chief
secretary to the Prince of M----, a nobleman connected with the
diplomacy of Russia, from which I quote an extract: "I wish, in short, to
recommend to your attentions, and in terms stronger than I know how to
devise, a young man on whose behalf the czar himself is privately known
to have expressed the very strongest interest. He was at the battle of
Waterloo as an aide-de-camp to a Dutch general officer, and is decorated
with distinctions won upon that awful day. However, though serving in
that instance under English orders, and although an Englishman of rank,
he does not belong to the English military service. He has served, young
as he is, under VARIOUS banners, and under ours, in particular, in the
cavalry of our imperial guard. He is English by birth, nephew to the Earl of
E., and heir presumptive to his immense estates. There is a wild story
current, that his mother was a gypsy of transcendent beauty, which may

 account for his somewhat Moorish complexion, though, after all, THAT is
not of a deeper tinge than I have seen among many an Englishman. He is
himself one of the noblest looking of God's creatures. Both father and
mother, however, are now dead. Since then he has become the favorite
of his uncle, who detained him in England after the emperor had
departed--and, as this uncle is now in the last stage of infirmity, Mr.
Wyndham's succession to the vast family estates is inevitable, and
probably near at hand. Meantime, he is anxious for some assistance in his
studies. Intellectually he stands in the very first rank of men, as I am
sure you will not be slow to discover; but his long military service, and
the unparalleled tumult of our European history since 1805, have
interfered (as you may suppose) with the cultivation of his mind; for he
entered the cavalry service of a German power when a mere boy, and
shifted about from service to service as the hurricane of war blew from
this point or from that. During the French anabasis to Moscow he entered
our service, made himself a prodigious favorite with the whole imperial
family, and even now is only in his twenty-second year. As to his
accomplishments, they will speak for themselves; they are infinite, and
applicable to every situation of life. Greek is what he wants from you;-never ask about terms. He will acknowledge any trouble he may give you,
as he acknowledges all trouble, en prince. And ten years hence you will
look back with pride upon having contributed your part to the formation
of one whom all here at St. Petersburg, not soldiers only, but we
diplomates, look upon as certain to prove a great man, and a leader
among the intellects of Christendom."
Two or three other letters followed; and at length it was arranged that Mr.
Maximilian Wyndham should take up his residence at my monastic abode
for one year. He was to keep a table, and an establishment of servants, at
his own cost; was to have an apartment of some dozen or so of rooms;
the unrestricted use of the library; with some other public privileges
willingly conceded by the magistracy of the town; in return for all which
he was to pay me a thousand guineas; and already beforehand, by way of
acknowledgment for the public civilities of the town, he sent, through my
hands, a contribution of three hundred guineas to the various local
institutions for education of the poor, or for charity.

 The Russian secretary had latterly corresponded with me from a little
German town, not more than ninety miles distant; and, as he had special
couriers at his service, the negotiations advanced so rapidly that all was
closed before the end of September. And, when once that consummation
was attained, I, that previously had breathed no syllable of what was
stirring, now gave loose to the interesting tidings, and suffered them to
spread through the whole compass of the town. It will be easily imagined
that such a story, already romantic enough in its first outline, would lose
nothing in the telling. An Englishman to begin with, which name of itself,
and at all times, is a passport into German favor, but much more since
the late memorable wars that but for Englishmen would have drooped
into disconnected efforts--next, an Englishman of rank and of the haute
noblesse--then a soldier covered with brilliant distinctions, and in the
most brilliant arm of the service; young, moreover, and yet a veteran by
his experience--fresh from the most awful battle of this planet since the
day of Pharsalia,--radiant with the favor of courts and of imperial ladies;
finally (which alone would have given him an interest in all female
hearts), an Antinous of faultless beauty, a Grecian statue, as it were, into
which the breath of life had been breathed by some modern Pygmalion;-such a pomp of gifts and endowments settling upon one man's head,
should not have required for its effect the vulgar consummation (and yet
to many it WAS the consummation and crest of the whole) that he was
reputed to be rich beyond the dreams of romance or the necessities of a
fairy tale. Unparalleled was the impression made upon our stagnant
society; every tongue was busy in discussing the marvelous young
Englishman from morning to night; every female fancy was busy in
depicting the personal appearance of this gay apparition.
On his arrival at my house, I became sensible of a truth which I had
observed some years before. The commonplace maxim is, that it is
dangerous to raise expectations too high. This, which is thus generally
expressed, and without limitation, is true only conditionally; it is true then
and there only where there is but little merit to sustain and justify the
expectation. But in any case where the merit is transcendent of its kind, it
is always useful to rack the expectation up to the highest point. In
anything which partakes of the infinite, the most unlimited expectations
will find ample room for gratification; while it is certain that ordinary
observers, possessing little sensibility, unless where they have been

 warned to expect, will often fail to see what exists in the most
conspicuous splendor. In this instance it certainly did no harm to the
subject of expectation that I had been warned to look for so much. The
warning, at any rate, put me on the lookout for whatever eminence there
might be of grandeur in his personal appearance; while, on the other
hand, this existed in such excess, so far transcending anything I had ever
met with in my experience, that no expectation which it is in words to
raise could have been disappointed.
These thoughts traveled with the rapidity of light through my brain, as at
one glance my eye took in the supremacy of beauty and power which
seemed to have alighted from the clouds before me. Power, and the
contemplation of power, in any absolute incarnation of grandeur or
excess, necessarily have the instantaneous effect of quelling all
perturbation. My composure was restored in a moment. I looked steadily
at him. We both bowed. And, at the moment when he raised his head
from that inclination, I caught the glance of his eye; an eye such as might
have been looked for in a face of such noble lineaments--

"Blending the nature of the star
With that of summer skies;"

and, therefore, meant by nature for the residence and organ of serene
and gentle emotions; but it surprised, and at the same time filled me
more almost with consternation than with pity, to observe that in those
eyes a light of sadness had settled more profound than seemed possible
for youth, or almost commensurate to a human sorrow; a sadness that
might have become a Jewish prophet, when laden with inspirations of
woe.
Two months had now passed away since the arrival of Mr. Wyndham. He
had been universally introduced to the superior society of the place; and,
as I need hardly say, universally received with favor and distinction. In
reality, his wealth and importance, his military honors, and the dignity of
his character, as expressed in his manners and deportment, were too
eminent to allow of his being treated with less than the highest attention

 in any society whatever. But the effect of these various advantages,
enforced and recommended as they were by a personal beauty so rare,
was somewhat too potent for the comfort and self-possession of ordinary
people; and really exceeded in a painful degree the standard of
pretensions under which such people could feel themselves at their ease.
He was not naturally of a reserved turn; far from it. His disposition had
been open, frank, and confiding, originally; and his roving, adventurous
life, of which considerably more than one half had been passed in camps,
had communicated to his manners a more than military frankness. But
the profound melancholy which possessed him, from whatever cause it
arose, necessarily chilled the native freedom of his demeanor, unless
when it was revived by strength of friendship or of love. The effect was
awkward and embarrassing to all parties. Every voice paused or faltered
when he entered a room--dead silence ensued--not an eye but was
directed upon him, or else, sunk in timidity, settled upon the floor; and
young ladies seriously lost the power, for a time, of doing more than
murmuring a few confused, half-inarticulate syllables, or half-inarticulate
sounds. The solemnity, in fact, of a first presentation, and the utter
impossibility of soon recovering a free, unembarrassed movement of
conversation, made such scenes really distressing to all who participated
in them, either as actors or spectators. Certainly this result was not a
pure effect of manly beauty, however heroic, and in whatever excess; it
arose in part from the many and extraordinary endowments which had
centered in his person, not less from fortune than from nature; in part
also, as I have said, from the profound sadness and freezing gravity of
Mr. Wyndham's manner; but still more from the perplexing mystery which
surrounded that sadness.
Were there, then, no exceptions to this condition of awestruck
admiration? Yes; one at least there was in whose bosom the spell of allconquering passion soon thawed every trace of icy reserve. While the rest
of the world retained a dim sentiment of awe toward Mr. Wyndham,
Margaret Liebenheim only heard of such a feeling to wonder that it could
exist toward HIM. Never was there so victorious a conquest interchanged
between two youthful hearts-- never before such a rapture of
instantaneous sympathy. I did not witness the first meeting of this
mysterious Maximilian and this magnificent Margaret, and do not know
whether Margaret manifested that trepidation and embarrassment which

 distressed so many of her youthful co-rivals; but, if she did, it must have
fled before the first glance of the young man's eye, which would interpret,
past all misunderstanding, the homage of his soul and the surrender of
his heart. Their third meeting I DID see; and there all shadow of
embarrassment had vanished, except, indeed, of that delicate
embarrassment which clings to impassioned admiration. On the part of
Margaret, it seemed as if a new world had dawned upon her that she had
not so much as suspected among the capacities of human experience.
Like some bird she seemed, with powers unexercised for soaring and
flying, not understood even as yet, and that never until now had found an
element of air capable of sustaining her wings, or tempting her to put
forth her buoyant instincts. He, on the other hand, now first found the
realization of his dreams, and for a mere possibility which he had long too
deeply contemplated, fearing, however, that in his own case it might
prove a chimera, or that he might never meet a woman answering the
demands of his heart, he now found a corresponding reality that left
nothing to seek.
Here, then, and thus far, nothing but happiness had resulted from the
new arrangement. But, if this had been little anticipated by many, far less
had I, for my part, anticipated the unhappy revolution which was wrought
in the whole nature of Ferdinand von Harrelstein. He was the son of a
German baron; a man of good family, but of small estate who had been
pretty nearly a soldier of fortune in the Prussian service, and had, late in
life, won sufficient favor with the king and other military superiors, to
have an early prospect of obtaining a commission, under flattering
auspices, for this only son--a son endeared to him as the companion of
unprosperous years, and as a dutifully affectionate child. Ferdinand had
yet another hold upon his father's affections: his features preserved to
the baron's unclouded remembrance a most faithful and living memorial
of that angelic wife who had died in giving birth to this third child--the
only one who had long survived her. Anxious that his son should go
through a regular course of mathematical instruction, now becoming
annually more important in all the artillery services throughout Europe,
and that he should receive a tincture of other liberal studies which he had
painfully missed in his own military career, the baron chose to keep his
son for the last seven years at our college, until he was now entering
upon his twenty-third year. For the four last he had lived with me as the

 sole pupil whom I had, or meant to have, had not the brilliant proposals
of the young Russian guardsman persuaded me to break my resolution.
Ferdinand von Harrelstein had good talents, not dazzling but respectable;
and so amiable were his temper and manners that I had introduced him
everywhere, and everywhere he was a favorite; and everywhere, indeed,
except exactly there where only in this world he cared for favor. Margaret
Liebenheim, she it was whom he loved, and had loved for years, with the
whole ardor of his ardent soul; she it was for whom, or at whose
command, he would willingly have died. Early he had felt that in her
hands lay his destiny; that she it was who must be his good or his evil
genius.
At first, and perhaps to the last, I pitied him exceedingly. But my pity
soon ceased to be mingled with respect. Before the arrival of Mr.
Wyndham he had shown himself generous, indeed magnanimous. But
never was there so painful an overthrow of a noble nature as manifested
itself in him. I believe that he had not himself suspected the strength of
his passion; and the sole resource for him, as I said often, was to quit the
city--to engage in active pursuits of enterprise, of ambition, or of science.
But he heard me as a somnambulist might have heard me--dreaming with
his eyes open. Sometimes he had fits of reverie, starting, fearful,
agitated; sometimes he broke out into maniacal movements of wrath,
invoking some absent person, praying, beseeching, menacing some airwove phantom; sometimes he slunk into solitary corners, muttering to
himself, and with gestures sorrowfully significant, or with tones and
fragments of expostulation that moved the most callous to compassion.
Still he turned a deaf ear to the only practical counsel that had a chance
for reaching his ears. Like a bird under the fascination of a rattlesnake, he
would not summon up the energies of his nature to make an effort at
flying away. "Begone, while it is time!" said others, as well as myself; for
more than I saw enough to fear some fearful catastrophe. "Lead us not
into temptation!" said his confessor to him in my hearing (for, though
Prussians, the Von Harrelsteins were Roman Catholics), "lead us not into
temptation!--that is our daily prayer to God. Then, my son, being led into
temptation, do not you persist in courting, nay, almost tempting
temptation. Try the effects of absence, though but for a month." The good
father even made an overture toward imposing a penance upon him, that
would have involved an absence of some duration. But he was obliged to

 desist; for he saw that, without effecting any good, he would merely add
spiritual disobedience to the other offenses of the young man. Ferdinand
himself drew his attention to THIS; for he said: "Reverend father! do not
you, with the purpose of removing me from temptation, be yourself the
instrument for tempting me into a rebellion against the church. Do not
you weave snares about my steps; snares there are already, and but too
many." The old man sighed, and desisted.
Then came--But enough! From pity, from sympathy, from counsel, and
from consolation, and from scorn--from each of these alike the poor
stricken deer "recoiled into the wilderness;" he fled for days together into
solitary parts of the forest; fled, as I still hoped and prayed, in good
earnest and for a long farewell; but, alas! no: still he returned to the
haunts of his ruined happiness and his buried hopes, at each return
looking more like the wreck of his former self; and once I heard a
penetrating monk observe, whose convent stood near the city gates:
"There goes one ready equally for doing or suffering, and of whom we
shall soon hear that he is involved in some great catastrophe--it may be
of deep calamity--it may be of memorable guilt."
So stood matters among us. January was drawing to its close; the
weather was growing more and more winterly; high winds, piercingly
cold, were raving through our narrow streets; and still the spirit of social
festivity bade defiance to the storms which sang through our ancient
forests. From the accident of our magistracy being selected from the
tradesmen of the city, the hospitalities of the place were far more
extensive than would otherwise have happened; for every member of the
corporation gave two annual entertainments in his official character. And
such was the rivalship which prevailed, that often one quarter of the
year's income was spent upon these galas. Nor was any ridicule thus
incurred; for the costliness of the entertainment was understood to be an
expression of OFFICIAL pride, done in honor of the city, not as an effort of
personal display. It followed, from the spirit in which these half-yearly
dances originated, that, being given on the part of the city, every
stranger of rank was marked out as a privileged guest, and the hospitality
of the community would have been equally affronted by failing to offer or
by failing to accept the invitation.

 Hence it had happened that the Russian guardsman had been introduced
into many a family which otherwise could not have hoped for such a
distinction. Upon the evening at which I am now arrived, the twentysecond of January, 1816, the whole city, in its wealthier classes, was
assembled beneath the roof of a tradesman who had the heart of a
prince. In every point our entertainment was superb; and I remarked that
the music was the finest I had heard for years. Our host was in joyous
spirits; proud to survey the splendid company he had gathered under his
roof; happy to witness their happiness; elated in their elation. Joyous was
the dance--joyous were all faces that I saw--up to midnight, very soon
after which time supper was announced; and that also, I think, was the
most joyous of all the banquets I ever witnessed. The accomplished
guardsman outshone himself in brilliancy; even his melancholy relaxed. In
fact, how could it be otherwise? near to him sat Margaret Liebenheim-hanging upon his words--more lustrous and bewitching than ever I had
beheld her. There she had been placed by the host; and everybody knew
why. That is one of the luxuries attached to love; all men cede their
places with pleasure; women make way. Even she herself knew, though
not obliged to know, why she was seated in that neighborhood; and took
her place, if with a rosy suffusion upon her cheeks, yet with fullness of
happiness at her heart.
The guardsman pressed forward to claim Miss Liebenheim's hand for the
next dance; a movement which she was quick to favor, by retreating
behind one or two parties from a person who seemed coming toward her.
The music again began to pour its voluptuous tides through the bounding
pulses of the youthful company; again the flying feet of the dancers
began to respond to the measures; again the mounting spirit of delight
began to fill the sails of the hurrying night with steady inspiration. All
went happily. Already had one dance finished; some were pacing up and
down, leaning on the arms of their partners; some were reposing from
their exertions; when--O heavens! what a shriek! what a gathering
tumult!
Every eye was bent toward the doors--every eye strained forward to
discover what was passing. But there, every moment, less and less could
be seen, for the gathering crowd more and more intercepted the view;-so much the more was the ear at leisure for the shrieks redoubled upon

 shrieks. Miss Liebenheim had moved downward to the crowd. From her
superior height she overlooked all the ladies at the point where she stood.
In the center stood a rustic girl, whose features had been familiar to her
for some months. She had recently come into the city, and had lived with
her uncle, a tradesman, not ten doors from Margaret's own residence,
partly on the terms of a kinswoman, partly as a servant on trial. At this
moment she was exhausted with excitement, and the nature of the shock
she had sustained. Mere panic seemed to have mastered her; and she
was leaning, unconscious and weeping, upon the shoulder of some
gentleman, who was endeavoring to soothe her. A silence of horror
seemed to possess the company, most of whom were still unacquainted
with the cause of the alarming interruption. A few, however, who had
heard her first agitated words, finding that they waited in vain for a fuller
explanation, now rushed tumultuously out of the ballroom to satisfy
themselves on the spot. The distance was not great; and within five
minutes several persons returned hastily, and cried out to the crowd of
ladies that all was true which the young girl had said. "What was true?"
That her uncle Mr. Weishaupt's family had been murdered; that not one
member of the family had been spared--namely, Mr. Weishaupt himself
and his wife, neither of them much above sixty, but both infirm beyond
their years; two maiden sisters of Mr. Weishaupt, from forty to forty-six
years of age, and an elderly female domestic.
An incident happened during the recital of these horrors, and of the
details which followed, that furnished matter for conversation even in
these hours when so thrilling an interest had possession of all minds.
Many ladies fainted; among them Miss Liebenheim--and she would have
fallen to the ground but for Maximilian, who sprang forward and caught
her in his arms. She was long of returning to herself; and, during the
agony of his suspense, he stooped and kissed her pallid lips. That sight
was more than could be borne by one who stood a little behind the group.
He rushed forward, with eyes glaring like a tiger's, and leveled a blow at
Maximilian. It was poor, maniacal Von Harrelstein, who had been absent
in the forest for a week. Many people stepped forward and checked his
arm, uplifted for a repetition of this outrage. One or two had some
influence with him, and led him away from the spot; while as to
Maximilian, so absorbed was he that he had not so much as perceived the
affront offered to himself. Margaret, on reviving, was confounded at

 finding herself so situated amid a great crowd; and yet the prudes
complained that there was a look of love exchanged between herself and
Maximilian, that ought not to have escaped her in such a situation. If they
meant by such a situation, one so public, it must be also recollected that
it was a situation of excessive agitation; but, if they alluded to the horrors
of the moment, no situation more naturally opens the heart to affection
and confiding love than the recoil from scenes of exquisite terror.
An examination went on that night before the magistrates, but all was
dark; although suspicion attached to a negro named Aaron, who had
occasionally been employed in menial services by the family, and had
been in the house immediately before the murder. The circumstances
were such as to leave every man in utter perplexity as to the presumption
for and against him. His mode of defending himself, and his general
deportment, were marked by the coolest, nay, the most sneering
indifference. The first thing he did, on being acquainted with the
suspicions against himself, was to laugh ferociously, and to all appearance
most cordially and unaffectedly. He demanded whether a poor man like
himself would have left so much wealth as lay scattered abroad in that
house--gold repeaters, massy plate, gold snuff boxes--untouched? That
argument certainly weighed much in his favor. And yet again it was
turned against him; for a magistrate asked him how HE happened to
know already that nothing had been touched. True it was, and a fact
which had puzzled no less than it had awed the magistrates, that, upon
their examination of the premises, many rich articles of bijouterie,
jewelry, and personal ornaments, had been found lying underanged, and
apparently in their usual situations; articles so portable that in the very
hastiest flight some might have been carried off. In particular, there was
a crucifix of gold, enriched with jewels so large and rare, that of itself it
would have constituted a prize of great magnitude. Yet this was left
untouched, though suspended in a little oratory that had been
magnificently adorned by the elder of the maiden sisters. There was an
altar, in itself a splendid object, furnished with every article of the most
costly material and workmanship, for the private celebration of mass. This
crucifix, as well as everything else in the little closet, must have been
seen by one at least of the murderous party; for hither had one of the
ladies fled; hither had one of the murderers pursued. She had clasped the
golden pillars which supported the altar--had turned perhaps her dying

 looks upon the crucifix; for there, with one arm still wreathed about the
altar foot, though in her agony she had turned round upon her face, did
the elder sister lie when the magistrates first broke open the street door.
And upon the beautiful parquet, or inlaid floor which ran round the room,
were still impressed the footsteps of the murderer. These, it was hoped,
might furnish a clew to the discovery of one at least among the
murderous band. They were rather difficult to trace accurately; those
parts of the traces which lay upon the black tessellae being less distinct in
the outline than the others upon the white or colored. Most
unquestionably, so far as this went, it furnished a negative circumstance
in favor of the negro, for the footsteps were very different in outline from
his, and smaller, for Aaron was a man of colossal build. And as to his
knowledge of the state in which the premises had been found, and his
having so familiarly relied upon the fact of no robbery having taken place
as an argument on his own behalf, he contended that he had himself been
among the crowd that pushed into the house along with the magistrates;
that, from his previous acquaintance with the rooms and their ordinary
condition, a glance of the eye had been sufficient for him to ascertain the
undisturbed condition of all the valuable property most obvious to the
grasp of a robber that, in fact, he had seen enough for his argument
before he and the rest of the mob had been ejected by the magistrates;
but, finally, that independently of all this, he had heard both the officers,
as they conducted him, and all the tumultuous gatherings of people in the
street, arguing for the mysteriousness of the bloody transaction upon that
very circumstance of so much gold, silver, and jewels, being left behind
untouched.
In six weeks or less from the date of this terrific event, the negro was set
at liberty by a majority of voices among the magistrates. In that short
interval other events had occurred no less terrific and mysterious. In this
first murder, though the motive was dark and unintelligible, yet the
agency was not so; ordinary assassins apparently, and with ordinary
means, had assailed a helpless and unprepared family; had separated
them; attacked them singly in flight (for in this first case all but one of the
murdered persons appeared to have been making for the street door);
and in all this there was no subject for wonder, except the original one as
to the motive. But now came a series of cases destined to fling this
earliest murder into the shade. Nobody could now be unprepared; and yet

 the tragedies, henceforward, which passed before us, one by one, in sad,
leisurely, or in terrific groups, seemed to argue a lethargy like that of
apoplexy in the victims, one and all. The very midnight of mysterious awe
fell upon all minds.
Three weeks had passed since the murder at Mr. Weishaupt's--three
weeks the most agitated that had been known in this sequestered city.
We felt ourselves solitary, and thrown upon our own resources; all
combination with other towns being unavailing from their great distance.
Our situation was no ordinary one. Had there been some mysterious
robbers among us, the chances of a visit, divided among so many, would
have been too small to distress the most timid; while to young and highspirited people, with courage to spare for ordinary trials, such a state of
expectation would have sent pulses of pleasurable anxiety among the
nerves. But murderers! exterminating murderers!--clothed in mystery and
utter darkness--these were objects too terrific for any family to
contemplate with fortitude. Had these very murderers added to their
functions those of robbery, they would have become less terrific; nine out
of every ten would have found themselves discharged, as it were, from
the roll of those who were liable to a visit; while such as knew themselves
liable would have had warning of their danger in the fact of being rich;
and would, from the very riches which constituted that danger, have
derived the means of repelling it. But, as things were, no man could
guess what it was that must make him obnoxious to the murderers.
Imagination exhausted itself in vain guesses at the causes which could by
possibility have made the poor Weishaupts objects of such hatred to any
man. True, they were bigoted in a degree which indicated feebleness of
intellect; but THAT wounded no man in particular, while to many it
recommended them. True, their charity was narrow and exclusive, but to
those of their own religious body it expanded munificently; and, being
rich beyond their wants, or any means of employing wealth which their
gloomy asceticism allowed, they had the power of doing a great deal of
good among the indigent papists of the suburbs. As to the old gentleman
and his wife, their infirmities confined them to the house. Nobody
remembered to have seen them abroad for years. How, therefore, or
when could they have made an enemy? And, with respect to the maiden
sisters of Mr. Weishaupt, they were simply weak-minded persons, now
and then too censorious, but not placed in a situation to incur serious

 anger from any quarter, and too little heard of in society to occupy much
of anybody's attention.
Conceive, then, that three weeks have passed away, that the poor
Weishaupts have been laid in that narrow sanctuary which no murderer's
voice will ever violate. Quiet has not returned to us, but the first
flutterings of panic have subsided. People are beginning to respire freely
again; and such another space of time would have cicatrized our wounds-when, hark! a church bell rings out a loud alarm;--the night is starlight
and frosty--the iron notes are heard clear, solemn, but agitated. What
could this mean? I hurried to a room over the porter's lodge, and,
opening the window, I cried out to a man passing hastily below, "What, in
God's name, is the meaning of this?" It was a watchman belonging to our
district. I knew his voice, he knew mine, and he replied in great agitation:
"It is another murder, sir, at the old town councilor's, Albernass; and this
time they have made a clear house of it."
"God preserve us! Has a curse been pronounced upon this city? What can
be done? What are the magistrates going to do?"
"I don't know, sir. I have orders to run to the Black Friars, where another
meeting is gathering. Shall I say you will attend, sir?"
"Yes--no--stop a little. No matter, you may go on; I'll follow
immediately."
I went instantly to Maximilian's room. He was lying asleep on a sofa, at
which I was not surprised, for there had been a severe stag chase in the
morning. Even at this moment I found myself arrested by two objects,
and I paused to survey them. One was Maximilian himself. A person so
mysterious took precedency of other interests even at a time like this;
and especially by his features, which, composed in profound sleep, as
sometimes happens, assumed a new expression, which arrested me
chiefly by awaking some confused remembrance of the same features
seen under other circumstances and in times long past; but where? This
was what I could not recollect, though once before a thought of the same
sort had crossed my mind. The other object of my interest was a

 miniature, which Maximilian was holding in his hand. He had gone to
sleep apparently looking at this picture; and the hand which held it had
slipped down upon the sofa, so that it was in danger of falling. I released
the miniature from his hand, and surveyed it attentively. It represented a
lady of sunny, oriental complexion, and features the most noble that it is
possible to conceive. One might have imagined such a lady, with her
raven locks and imperial eyes, to be the favorite sultana of some Amurath
or Mohammed. What was she to Maximilian, or what HAD she been? For,
by the tear which I had once seen him drop upon this miniature when he
believed himself unobserved, I conjectured that her dark tresses were
already laid low, and her name among the list of vanished things.
Probably she was his mother, for the dress was rich with pearls, and
evidently that of a person in the highest rank of court beauties. I sighed
as I thought of the stern melancholy of her son, if Maximilian were he, as
connected, probably, with the fate and fortunes of this majestic beauty;
somewhat haughty, perhaps, in the expression of her fine features, but
still noble--generous-- confiding. Laying the picture on the table, I awoke
Maximilian, and told him of the dreadful news. He listened attentively,
made no remark, but proposed that we should go together to the meeting
of our quarter at the Black Friars. He colored upon observing the
miniature on the table; and, therefore, I frankly told him in what situation
I had found it, and that I had taken the liberty of admiring it for a few
moments. He pressed it tenderly to his lips, sighed heavily, and we
walked away together.
I pass over the frenzied state of feeling in which we found the meeting.
Fear, or rather horror, did not promote harmony; many quarreled with
each other in discussing the suggestions brought forward, and Maximilian
was the only person attended to. He proposed a nightly mounted patrol
for every district. And in particular he offered, as being himself a member
of the university, that the students should form themselves into a guard,
and go out by rotation to keep watch and ward from sunset to sunrise.
Arrangements were made toward that object by the few people who
retained possession of their senses, and for the present we separated.
Never, in fact, did any events so keenly try the difference between man
and man. Some started up into heroes under the excitement. Some, alas
for the dignity of man! drooped into helpless imbecility. Women, in some

 cases, rose superior to men, but yet not so often as might have happened
under a less mysterious danger. A woman is not unwomanly because she
confronts danger boldly. But I have remarked, with respect to female
courage, that it requires, more than that of men, to be sustained by
hope; and that it droops more certainly in the presence of a MYSTERIOUS
danger. The fancy of women is more active, if not stronger, and it
influences more directly the physical nature. In this case few were the
women who made even a show of defying the danger. On the contrary,
with THEM fear took the form of sadness, while with many of the men it
took that of wrath.
And how did the Russian guardsman conduct himself amidst this panic?
Many were surprised at his behavior; some complained of it; I did neither.
He took a reasonable interest in each separate case, listened to the
details with attention, and, in the examination of persons able to furnish
evidence, never failed to suggest judicious questions. But still he
manifested a coolness almost amounting to carelessness, which to many
appeared revolting. But these people I desired to notice that all the other
military students, who had been long in the army, felt exactly in the same
way. In fact, the military service of Christendom, for the last ten years,
had been anything but a parade service; and to those, therefore, who
were familiar with every form of horrid butchery, the mere outside horrors
of death had lost much of their terror. In the recent murder there had not
been much to call forth sympathy. The family consisted of two old
bachelors, two sisters, and one grandniece. The niece was absent on a
visit, and the two old men were cynical misers, to whom little personal
interest attached. Still, in this case as in that of the Weishaupts, the same
twofold mystery confounded the public mind--the mystery of the HOW,
and the profounder mystery of the WHY. Here, again, no atom of property
was taken, though both the misers had hordes of ducats and English
guineas in the very room where they died. Their bias, again, though of an
unpopular character, had rather availed to make them unknown than to
make them hateful. In one point this case differed memorably from the
other--that, instead of falling helpless, or flying victims (as the
Weishaupts had done), these old men, strong, resolute, and not so much
taken by surprise, left proofs that they had made a desperate defense.
The furniture was partly smashed to pieces, and the other details
furnished evidence still more revolting of the acharnement with which the

 struggle had been maintained. In fact, with THEM a surprise must have
been impracticable, as they admitted nobody into their house on visiting
terms. It was thought singular that from each of these domestic tragedies
a benefit of the same sort should result to young persons standing in
nearly the same relation. The girl who gave the alarm at the ball, with
two little sisters, and a little orphan nephew, their cousin, divided the
very large inheritance of the Weishaupts; and in this latter case the
accumulated savings of two long lives all vested in the person of the
amiable grandniece.
But now, as if in mockery of all our anxious consultations and elaborate
devices, three fresh murders took place on the two consecutive nights
succeeding these new arrangements. And in one case, as nearly as time
could be noted, the mounted patrol must have been within call at the very
moment when the awful work was going on. I shall not dwell much upon
them; but a few circumstances are too interesting to be passed over. The
earliest case on the first of the two nights was that of a currier. He was
fifty years old; not rich, but well off. His first wife was dead, and his
daughters by her were married away from their father's house. He had
married a second wife, but, having no children by her, and keeping no
servants, it is probable that, but for an accident, no third person would
have been in the house at the time when the murderers got admittance.
About seven o'clock, a wayfaring man, a journeyman currier, who,
according to our German system, was now in his wanderjahre, entered
the city from the forest. At the gate he made some inquiries about the
curriers and tanners of our town; and, agreeably to the information he
received, made his way to this Mr. Heinberg. Mr. Heinberg refused to
admit him, until he mentioned his errand, and pushed below the door a
letter of recommendation from a Silesian correspondent, describing him
as an excellent and steady workman. Wanting such a man, and satisfied
by the answers returned that he was what he represented himself, Mr.
Heinberg unbolted his door and admitted him. Then, after slipping the
bolt into its place, he bade him sit to the fire, brought him a glass of beer,
conversed with him for ten minutes, and said: "You had better stay here
to-night; I'll tell you why afterwards; but now I'll step upstairs, and ask
my wife whether she can make up a bed for you; and do you mind the
door while I'm away." So saying, he went out of the room. Not one
minute had he been gone when there came a gentle knock at the door. It

 was raining heavily, and, being a stranger to the city, not dreaming that
in any crowded town such a state of things could exist as really did in
this, the young man, without hesitation, admitted the person knocking.
He has declared since--but, perhaps, confounding the feelings gained
from better knowledge with the feelings of the moment--that from the
moment he drew the bolt he had a misgiving that he had done wrong. A
man entered in a horseman's cloak, and so muffled up that the
journeyman could discover none of his features. In a low tone the
stranger said, "Where's Heinberg?"--"Upstairs."--"Call him down, then."
The journeyman went to the door by which Mr. Heinberg had left him, and
called, "Mr. Heinberg, here's one wanting you!" Mr. Heinberg heard him,
for the man could distinctly catch these words: "God bless me! has the
man opened the door? O, the traitor! I see it." Upon this he felt more and
more consternation, though not knowing why. Just then he heard a sound
of feet behind him. On turning round, he beheld three more men in the
room; one was fastening the outer door; one was drawing some arms
from a cupboard, and two others were whispering together. He himself
was disturbed and perplexed, and felt that all was not right. Such was his
confusion, that either all the men's faces must have been muffled up, or
at least he remembered nothing distinctly but one fierce pair of eyes
glaring upon him. Then, before he could look round, came a man from
behind and threw a sack over his head, which was drawn tight about his
waist, so as to confine his arms, as well as to impede his hearing in part,
and his voice altogether. He was then pushed into a room; but previously
he had heard a rush upstairs, and words like those of a person exulting,
and then a door closed. Once it opened, and he could distinguish the
words, in one voice, "And for THAT!" to which another voice replied, in
tones that made his heart quake, "Aye, for THAT, sir." And then the same
voice went on rapidly to say, "O dog! could you hope"--at which word the
door closed again. Once he thought that he heard a scuffle, and he was
sure that he heard the sound of feet, as if rushing from one corner of a
room to another. But then all was hushed and still for about six or seven
minutes, until a voice close to his ear said, "Now, wait quietly till some
persons come in to release you. This will happen within half an hour."
Accordingly, in less than that time, he again heard the sound of feet
within the house, his own bandages were liberated, and he was brought
to tell his story at the police office. Mr. Heinberg was found in his
bedroom. He had died by strangulation, and the cord was still tightened

 about his neck. During the whole dreadful scene his youthful wife had
been locked into a closet, where she heard or saw nothing.
In the second case, the object of vengeance was again an elderly man. Of
the ordinary family, all were absent at a country house, except the
master and a female servant. She was a woman of courage, and blessed
with the firmest nerves; so that she might have been relied on for
reporting accurately everything seen or heard. But things took another
course. The first warning that she had of the murderers' presence was
from their steps and voices already in the hall. She heard her master run
hastily into the hall, crying out, "Lord Jesus!--Mary, Mary, save me!" The
servant resolved to give what aid she could, seized a large poker, and
was hurrying to his assistance, when she found that they had nailed up
the door of communication at the head of the stairs. What passed after
this she could not tell; for, when the impulse of intrepid fidelity had been
balked, and she found that her own safety was provided for by means
which made it impossible to aid a poor fellow creature who had just
invoked her name, the generous-hearted creature was overcome by
anguish of mind, and sank down on the stair, where she lay, unconscious
of all that succeeded, until she found herself raised in the arms of a mob
who had entered the house. And how came they to have entered? In a
way characteristically dreadful. The night was starlit; the patrols had
perambulated the street without noticing anything suspicious, when two
foot passengers, who were following in their rear, observed a darkcolored stream traversing the causeway. One of them, at the same
instant tracing the stream backward with his eyes, observed that it flowed
from under the door of Mr. Munzer, and, dipping his finger in the trickling
fluid, he held it up to the lamplight, yelling out at the moment, "Why, this
is blood!" It was so, indeed, and it was yet warm. The other saw, heard,
and like an arrow flew after the horse patrol, then in the act of turning the
corner. One cry, full of meaning, was sufficient for ears full of expectation.
The horsemen pulled up, wheeled, and in another moment reined up at
Mr. Munzer's door. The crowd, gathering like the drifting of snow,
supplied implements which soon forced the chains of the door and all
other obstacles. But the murderous party had escaped, and all traces of
their persons had vanished, as usual.

 Rarely did any case occur without some peculiarity more or less
interesting. In that which happened on the following night, making the
fifth in the series, an impressive incident varied the monotony of horrors.
In this case the parties aimed at were two elderly ladies, who conducted a
female boarding school. None of the pupils had as yet returned to school
from their vacation; but two sisters, young girls of thirteen and sixteen,
coming from a distance, had stayed at school throughout the Christmas
holidays. It was the youngest of these who gave the only evidence of any
value, and one which added a new feature of alarm to the existing panic.
Thus it was that her testimony was given: On the day before the murder,
she and her sister were sitting with the old ladies in a room fronting to
the street; the elder ladies were reading, the younger ones drawing.
Louisa, the youngest, never had her ear inattentive to the slightest sound,
and once it struck her that she heard the creaking of a foot upon the
stairs. She said nothing, but, slipping out of the room, she ascertained
that the two female servants were in the kitchen, and could not have
been absent; that all the doors and windows, by which ingress was
possible, were not only locked, but bolted and barred--a fact which
excluded all possibility of invasion by means of false keys. Still she felt
persuaded that she had heard the sound of a heavy foot upon the stairs.
It was, however, daylight, and this gave her confidence; so that, without
communicating her alarm to anybody, she found courage to traverse the
house in every direction; and, as nothing was either seen or heard, she
concluded that her ears had been too sensitively awake. Yet that night, as
she lay in bed, dim terrors assailed her, especially because she
considered that, in so large a house, some closet or other might have
been overlooked, and, in particular, she did not remember to have
examined one or two chests, in which a man could have lain concealed.
Through the greater part of the night she lay awake; but as one of the
town clocks struck four, she dismissed her anxieties, and fell asleep. The
next day, wearied with this unusual watching, she proposed to her sister
that they should go to bed earlier than usual. This they did; and, on their
way upstairs, Louisa happened to think suddenly of a heavy cloak, which
would improve the coverings of her bed against the severity of the night.
The cloak was hanging up in a closet within a closet, both leading off from
a large room used as the young ladies' dancing school. These closets she
had examined on the previous day, and therefore she felt no particular
alarm at this moment. The cloak was the first article which met her sight;

 it was suspended from a hook in the wall, and close to the door. She took
it down, but, in doing so, exposed part of the wall and of the floor, which
its folds had previously concealed. Turning away hastily, the chances were
that she had gone without making any discovery. In the act of turning,
however, her light fell brightly on a man's foot and leg. Matchless was her
presence of mind; having previously been humming an air, she continued
to do so. But now came the trial; her sister was bending her steps to the
same closet. If she suffered her to do so, Lottchen would stumble on the
same discovery, and expire of fright. On the other hand, if she gave her a
hint, Lottchen would either fail to understand her, or, gaining but a
glimpse of her meaning, would shriek aloud, or by some equally decisive
expression convey the fatal news to the assassin that he had been
discovered. In this torturing dilemma fear prompted an expedient, which
to Lottchen appeared madness, and to Louisa herself the act of a sibyl
instinct with blind inspiration. "Here," said she, "is our dancing room.
When shall we all meet and dance again together?" Saying which, she
commenced a wild dance, whirling her candle round her head until the
motion extinguished it; then, eddying round her sister in narrowing
circles, she seized Lottchen's candle also, blew it out, and then
interrupted her own singing to attempt a laugh. But the laugh was
hysterical. The darkness, however, favored her; and, seizing her sister's
arm, she forced her along, whispering, "Come, come, come!" Lottchen
could not be so dull as entirely to misunderstand her. She suffered herself
to be led up the first flight of stairs, at the head of which was a room
looking into the street. In this they would have gained an asylum, for the
door had a strong bolt. But, as they were on the last steps of the landing,
they could hear the hard breathing and long strides of the murderer
ascending behind them. He had watched them through a crevice, and had
been satisfied by the hysterical laugh of Louisa that she had seen him. In
the darkness he could not follow fast, from ignorance of the localities,
until he found himself upon the stairs. Louisa, dragging her sister along,
felt strong as with the strength of lunacy, but Lottchen hung like a weight
of lead upon her. She rushed into the room, but at the very entrance
Lottchen fell. At that moment the assassin exchanged his stealthy pace
for a loud clattering ascent. Already he was on the topmost stair; already
he was throwing himself at a bound against the door, when Louisa,
having dragged her sister into the room, closed the door and sent the bolt
home in the very instant that the murderer's hand came into contact with

 the handle. Then, from the violence of her emotions, she fell down in a fit,
with her arm around the sister whom she had saved.
How long they lay in this state neither ever knew. The two old ladies had
rushed upstairs on hearing the tumult. Other persons had been concealed
in other parts of the house. The servants found themselves suddenly
locked in, and were not sorry to be saved from a collision which involved
so awful a danger. The old ladies had rushed, side by side, into the very
center of those who were seeking them. Retreat was impossible; two
persons at least were heard following them upstairs. Something like a
shrieking expostulation and counter-expostulation went on between the
ladies and the murderers; then came louder voices--then one heartpiercing shriek, and then another--and then a slow moaning and a dead
silence. Shortly afterwards was heard the first crashing of the door inward
by the mob; but the murderers had fled upon the first alarm, and, to the
astonishment of the servants, had fled upward. Examination, however,
explained this: from a window in the roof they had passed to an adjoining
house recently left empty; and here, as in other cases, we had proof how
apt people are, in the midst of elaborate provisions against remote
dangers, to neglect those which are obvious.
The reign of terror, it may be supposed, had now reached its acme. The
two old ladies were both lying dead at different points on the staircase,
and, as usual, no conjecture could be made as to the nature of the
offense which they had given; but that the murder WAS a vindictive one,
the usual evidence remained behind, in the proofs that no robbery had
been attempted. Two new features, however, were now brought forward
in this system of horrors, one of which riveted the sense of their
insecurity to all families occupying extensive houses, and the other raised
ill blood between the city and the university, such as required years to
allay. The first arose out of the experience, now first obtained, that these
assassins pursued the plan of secreting themselves within the house
where they meditated a murder. All the care, therefore, previously
directed to the securing of doors and windows after nightfall appeared
nugatory. The other feature brought to light on this occasion was vouched
for by one of the servants, who declared that, the moment before the
door of the kitchen was fastened upon herself and fellow servant, she saw
two men in the hall, one on the point of ascending the stairs, the other

 making toward the kitchen; that she could not distinguish the faces of
either, but that both were dressed in the academic costume belonging to
the students of the university. The consequences of such a declaration
need scarcely be mentioned. Suspicion settled upon the students, who
were more numerous since the general peace, in a much larger proportion
military, and less select or respectable than heretofore. Still, no part of
the mystery was cleared up by this discovery. Many of the students were
poor enough to feel the temptation that might be offered by any
LUCRATIVE system of outrage. Jealous and painful collusions were, in the
meantime, produced; and, during the latter two months of this winter, it
may be said that our city exhibited the very anarchy of evil passions. This
condition of things lasted until the dawning of another spring.
It will be supposed that communications were made to the supreme
government of the land as soon as the murders in our city were
understood to be no casual occurrences, but links in a systematic series.
Perhaps it might happen from some other business, of a higher kind, just
then engaging the attention of our governors, that our representations did
not make the impression we had expected. We could not, indeed,
complain of absolute neglect from the government. They sent down one
or two of their most accomplished police officers, and they suggested
some counsels, especially that we should examine more strictly into the
quality of the miscellaneous population who occupied our large suburb.
But they more than hinted that no necessity was seen either for
quartering troops upon us, or for arming our local magistracy with ampler
powers.
This correspondence with the central government occupied the month of
March, and, before that time, the bloody system had ceased as abruptly
as it began. The new police officer flattered himself that the terror of his
name had wrought this effect; but judicious people thought otherwise. All,
however, was quiet until the depth of summer, when, by way of hinting to
us, perhaps, that the dreadful power which clothed itself with darkness
had not expired, but was only reposing from its labors, all at once the
chief jailer of the city was missing. He had been in the habit of taking long
rides in the forest, his present situation being much of a sinecure. It was
on the first of July that he was missed. In riding through the city gates
that morning, he had mentioned the direction which he meant to pursue;

 and the last time he was seen alive was in one of the forest avenues,
about eight miles from the city, leading toward the point he had indicated.
This jailer was not a man to be regretted on his own account; his life had
been a tissue of cruelty and brutal abuse of his powers, in which he had
been too much supported by the magistrates, partly on the plea that it
was their duty to back their own officers against all complainers, partly
also from the necessities created by the turbulent times for a more
summary exercise of their magisterial authority. No man, therefore, on
his own separate account, could more willingly have been spared than
this brutal jailer; and it was a general remark that, had the murderous
band within our walls swept away this man only, they would have merited
the public gratitude as purifiers from a public nuisance. But was it certain
that the jailer had died by the same hands as had so deeply afflicted the
peace of our city during the winter--or, indeed, that he had been
murdered at all? The forest was too extensive to be searched; and it was
possible that he might have met with some fatal accident. His horse had
returned to the city gates in the night, and was found there in the
morning. Nobody, however, for months could give information about his
rider; and it seemed probable that he would not be discovered until the
autumn and the winter should again carry the sportsman into every
thicket and dingle of this sylvan tract. One person only seemed to have
more knowledge on this subject than others, and that was poor Ferdinand
von Harrelstein. He was now a mere ruin of what he had once been, both
as to intellect and moral feeling; and I observed him frequently smile
when the jailer was mentioned. "Wait," he would say, "till the leaves
begin to drop; then you will see what fine fruit our forest bears." I did not
repeat these expressions to anybody except one friend, who agreed with
me that the jailer had probably been hanged in some recess of the forest,
which summer veiled with its luxuriant umbrage; and that Ferdinand,
constantly wandering in the forest, had discovered the body; but we both
acquitted him of having been an accomplice in the murder.
Meantime the marriage between Margaret Liebenheim and Maximilian was
understood to be drawing near. Yet one thing struck everybody with
astonishment. As far as the young people were concerned, nobody could
doubt that all was arranged; for never was happiness more perfect than
that which seemed to unite them. Margaret was the impersonation of
May-time and youthful rapture; even Maximilian in her presence seemed

 to forget his gloom, and the worm which gnawed at his heart was
charmed asleep by the music of her voice, and the paradise of her smiles.
But, until the autumn came, Margaret's grandfather had never ceased to
frown upon this connection, and to support the pretensions of Ferdinand.
The dislike, indeed, seemed reciprocal between him and Maximilian. Each
avoided the other's company and as to the old man, he went so far as to
speak sneeringly of Maximilian. Maximilian despised him too heartily to
speak of him at all. When he could not avoid meeting him, he treated him
with a stern courtesy, which distressed Margaret as often as she
witnessed it. She felt that her grandfather had been the aggressor; and
she felt also that he did injustice to the merits of her lover. But she had a
filial tenderness for the old man, as the father of her sainted mother, and
on his own account, continually making more claims on her pity, as the
decay of his memory, and a childish fretfulness growing upon him from
day to day, marked his increasing imbecility.
Equally mysterious it seemed, that about this time Miss Liebenheim began
to receive anonymous letters, written in the darkest and most menacing
terms. Some of them she showed to me. I could not guess at their drift.
Evidently they glanced at Maximilian, and bade her beware of connection
with him; and dreadful things were insinuated about him. Could these
letters be written by Ferdinand? Written they were not, but could they be
dictated by him? Much I feared that they were; and the more so for one
reason.
All at once, and most inexplicably, Margaret's grandfather showed a total
change of opinion in his views as to her marriage. Instead of favoring
Harrelstein's pretensions, as he had hitherto done, he now threw the
feeble weight of his encouragement into Maximilian's scale; though, from
the situation of all the parties, nobody attached any PRACTICAL
importance to the change in Mr. Liebenheim's way of thinking. Nobody? Is
that true? No; one person DID attach the greatest weight to the change-poor, ruined Ferdinand. He, so long as there was one person to take his
part, so long as the grandfather of Margaret showed countenance to
himself, had still felt his situation not utterly desperate.
Thus were things situated, when in November, all the leaves daily blowing
off from the woods, and leaving bare the most secret haunts of the

 thickets, the body of the jailer was left exposed in the forest; but not, as I
and my friend had conjectured, hanged. No; he had died apparently by a
more horrid death--by that of crucifixion. The tree, a remarkable one,
bore upon a part of its trunk this brief but savage inscription:--"T. H.,
jailer at -----; Crucified July 1, 1816."
A great deal of talk went on throughout the city upon this discovery;
nobody uttered one word of regret on account of the wretched jailer; on
the contrary, the voice of vengeance, rising up in many a cottage,
reached my ears in every direction as I walked abroad. The hatred in
itself seemed horrid and unchristian, and still more so after the man's
death; but, though horrid and fiendish for itself, it was much more
impressive, considered as the measure and exponent of the damnable
oppression which must have existed to produce it.
At first, when the absence of the jailer was a recent occurrence, and the
presence of the murderers among us was, in consequence, revived to our
anxious thoughts, it was an event which few alluded to without fear. But
matters were changed now; the jailer had been dead for months, and this
interval, during which the murderer's hand had slept, encouraged
everybody to hope that the storm had passed over our city; that peace
had returned to our hearths; and that henceforth weakness might sleep in
safety, and innocence without anxiety. Once more we had peace within
our walls, and tranquillity by our firesides. Again the child went to bed in
cheerfulness, and the old man said his prayers in serenity. Confidence
was restored; peace was re-established; and once again the sanctity of
human life became the rule and the principle for all human hands among
us. Great was the joy; the happiness was universal.
O heavens! by what a thunderbolt were we awakened from our security!
On the night of the twenty-seventh of December, half an hour, it might
be, after twelve o'clock, an alarm was given that all was not right in the
house of Mr. Liebenheim. Vast was the crowd which soon collected in
breathless agitation. In two minutes a man who had gone round by the
back of the house was heard unbarring Mr. Liebenheim's door: he was
incapable of uttering a word; but his gestures, as he threw the door open
and beckoned to the crowd, were quite enough. In the hall, at the further
extremity, and as if arrested in the act of making for the back door, lay

 the bodies of old Mr. Liebenheim and one of his sisters, an aged widow;
on the stair lay another sister, younger and unmarried, but upward of
sixty. The hall and lower flight of stairs were floating with blood. Where,
then, was Miss Liebenheim, the granddaughter? That was the universal
cry; for she was beloved as generally as she was admired. Had the
infernal murderers been devilish enough to break into that temple of
innocent and happy life? Everyone asked the question, and everyone held
his breath to listen; but for a few moments no one dared to advance; for
the silence of the house was ominous. At length some one cried out that
Miss Liebenheim had that day gone upon a visit to a friend, whose house
was forty miles distant in the forest. "Aye," replied another," she had
settled to go; but I heard that something had stopped her." The suspense
was now at its height, and the crowd passed from room to room, but
found no traces of Miss Liebenheim. At length they ascended the stair,
and in the very first room, a small closet, or boudoir, lay Margaret, with
her dress soiled hideously with blood. The first impression was that she
also had been murdered; but, on a nearer approach, she appeared to be
unwounded, and was manifestly alive. Life had not departed, for her
breath sent a haze over a mirror, but it was suspended, and she was
laboring in some kind of fit. The first act of the crowd was to carry her
into the house of a friend on the opposite side of the street, by which time
medical assistance had crowded to the spot. Their attentions to Miss
Liebenheim had naturally deranged the condition of things in the little
room, but not before many people found time to remark that one of the
murderers must have carried her with his bloody hands to the sofa on
which she lay, for water had been sprinkled profusely over her face and
throat, and water was even placed ready to her hand, when she might
happen to recover, upon a low foot-stool by the side of the sofa.
On the following morning, Maximilian, who had been upon a hunting party
in the forest, returned to the city, and immediately learned the news. I
did not see him for some hours after, but he then appeared to me
thoroughly agitated, for the first time I had known him to be so. In the
evening another perplexing piece of intelligence transpired with regard to
Miss Liebenheim, which at first afflicted every friend of that young lady. It
was that she had been seized with the pains of childbirth, and delivered of
a son, who, however, being born prematurely, did not live many hours.
Scandal, however, was not allowed long to batten upon this imaginary

 triumph, for within two hours after the circulation of this first rumor,
followed a second, authenticated, announcing that Maximilian had
appeared with the confessor of the Liebenheim family, at the residence of
the chief magistrate, and there produced satisfactory proofs of his
marriage with Miss Liebenheim, which had been duly celebrated, though
with great secrecy, nearly eight months before. In our city, as in all the
cities of our country, clandestine marriages, witnessed, perhaps, by two
friends only of the parties, besides the officiating priest, are exceedingly
common. In the mere fact, therefore, taken separately, there was nothing
to surprise us, but, taken in connection with the general position of the
parties, it DID surprise us all; nor could we conjecture the reason for a
step apparently so needless. For, that Maximilian could have thought it
any point of prudence or necessity to secure the hand of Margaret
Liebenheim by a private marriage, against the final opposition of her
grandfather, nobody who knew the parties, who knew the perfect love
which possessed Miss Liebenbeim, the growing imbecility of her
grandfather, or the utter contempt with which Maximilian regarded him,
could for a moment believe. Altogether, the matter was one of profound
mystery.
Meantime, it rejoiced me that poor Margaret's name had been thus
rescued from the fangs of the scandalmongers. These harpies had their
prey torn from them at the very moment when they were sitting down to
the unhallowed banquet. For this I rejoiced, but else there was little
subject for rejoicing in anything which concerned poor Margaret. Long she
lay in deep insensibility, taking no notice of anything, rarely opening her
eyes, and apparently unconscious of the revolutions, as they succeeded,
of morning or evening, light or darkness, yesterday or to-day. Great was
the agitation which convulsed the heart of Maximilian during this period;
he walked up and down in the cathedral nearly all day long, and the
ravages which anxiety was working in his physical system might be read
in his face. People felt it an intrusion upon the sanctity of his grief to look
at him too narrowly, and the whole town sympathized with his situation.
At length a change took place in Margaret, but one which the medical
men announced to Maximilian as boding ill for her recovery. The
wanderings of her mind did not depart, but they altered their character.
She became more agitated; she would start up suddenly, and strain her

 eye-sight after some figure which she seemed to see; then she would
apostrophize some person in the most piteous terms, beseeching him,
with streaming eyes, to spare her old grandfather. "Look, look," she
would cry out, "look at his gray hairs! O, sir! he is but a child; he does not
know what he says; and he will soon be out of the way and in his grave;
and very soon, sir, he will give you no more trouble." Then, again, she
would mutter indistinctly for hours together; sometimes she would cry out
frantically, and say things which terrified the bystanders, and which the
physicians would solemnly caution them how they repeated; then she
would weep, and invoke Maximilian to come and aid her. But seldom,
indeed, did that name pass her lips that she did not again begin to strain
her eyeballs, and start up in bed to watch some phantom of her poor,
fevered heart, as if it seemed vanishing into some mighty distance.
After nearly seven weeks passed in this agitating state, suddenly, on one
morning, the earliest and the loveliest of dawning spring, a change was
announced to us all as having taken place in Margaret; but it was a
change, alas! that ushered in the last great change of all. The conflict,
which had for so long a period raged within her, and overthrown her
reason, was at an end; the strife was over, and nature was settling into
an everlasting rest. In the course of the night she had recovered her
senses. When the morning light penetrated through her curtain, she
recognized her attendants, made inquiries as to the month and the day of
the month, and then, sensible that she could not outlive the day, she
requested that her confessor might be summoned.
About an hour and a half the confessor remained alone with her. At the
end of that time he came out, and hastily summoned the attendants, for
Margaret, he said, was sinking into a fainting fit. The confessor himself
might have passed through many a fit, so much was he changed by the
results of this interview. I crossed him coming out of the house. I spoke
to him--I called to him; but he heard me not--he saw me not. He saw
nobody. Onward he strode to the cathedral, where Maximilian was sure to
be found, pacing about upon the graves. Him he seized by the arm,
whispered something into his ear, and then both retired into one of the
many sequestered chapels in which lights are continually burning. There
they had some conversation, but not very long, for within five minutes
Maximilian strode away to the house in which his young wife was dying.

 One step seemed to carry him upstairs. The attendants, according to the
directions they had received from the physicians, mustered at the head of
the stairs to oppose him. But that was idle: before the rights which he
held as a lover and a husband-- before the still more sacred rights of
grief, which he carried in his countenance, all opposition fled like a dream.
There was, besides, a fury in his eye. A motion of his hand waved them
off like summer flies; he entered the room, and once again, for the last
time, he was in company with his beloved.
What passed who could pretend to guess? Something more than two
hours had elapsed, during which Margaret had been able to talk
occasionally, which was known, because at times the attendants heard
the sound of Maximilian's voice evidently in tones of reply to something
which she had said. At the end of that time, a little bell, placed near the
bedside, was rung hastily. A fainting fit had seized Margaret; but she
recovered almost before her women applied the usual remedies. They
lingered, however, a little, looking at the youthful couple with an interest
which no restraints availed to check. Their hands were locked together,
and in Margaret's eyes there gleamed a farewell light of love, which
settled upon Maximilian, and seemed to indicate that she was becoming
speechless. Just at this moment she made a feeble effort to draw
Maximilian toward her; he bent forward and kissed her with an anguish
that made the most callous weep, and then he whispered something into
her ear, upon which the attendants retired, taking this as a proof that
their presence was a hindrance to a free communication. But they heard
no more talking, and in less than ten minutes they returned. Maximilian
and Margaret still retained their former position. Their hands were fast
locked together; the same parting ray of affection, the same farewell light
of love, was in the eye of Margaret, and still it settled upon Maximilian.
But her eyes were beginning to grow dim; mists were rapidly stealing
over them. Maximilian, who sat stupefied and like one not in his right
mind, now, at the gentle request of the women, resigned his seat, for the
hand which had clasped his had already relaxed its hold; the farewell
gleam of love had departed. One of the women closed her eyelids; and
there fell asleep forever the loveliest flower that our city had reared for
generations.

 The funeral took place on the fourth day after her death. In the morning
of that day, from strong affection--having known her from an infant--I
begged permission to see the corpse. She was in her coffin; snowdrops
and crocuses were laid upon her innocent bosom, and roses, of that sort
which the season allowed, over her person. These and other lovely
symbols of youth, of springtime, and of resurrection, caught my eye for
the first moment; but in the next it fell upon her face. Mighty God! what a
change! what a transfiguration! Still, indeed, there was the same innocent
sweetness; still there was something of the same loveliness; the
expression still remained; but for the features--all trace of flesh seemed
to have vanished; mere outline of bony structure remained; mere
pencilings and shadowings of what she once had been. This is, indeed, I
exclaimed, "dust to dust--ashes to ashes!"
Maximilian, to the astonishment of everybody, attended the funeral. It
was celebrated in the cathedral. All made way for him, and at times he
seemed collected; at times he reeled like one who was drunk. He heard
as one who hears not; he saw as one in a dream. The whole ceremony
went on by torchlight, and toward the close he stood like a pillar,
motionless, torpid, frozen. But the great burst of the choir, and the
mighty blare ascending from our vast organ at the closing of the grave,
recalled him to himself, and he strode rapidly homeward. Half an hour
after I returned, I was summoned to his bedroom. He was in bed, calm
and collected. What he said to me I remember as if it had been
yesterday, and the very tone with which he said it, although more than
twenty years have passed since then. He began thus: "I have not long to
live"; and when he saw me start, suddenly awakened into a
consciousness that perhaps he had taken poison, and meant to intimate
as much, he continued: "You fancy I have taken poison;--no matter
whether I have or not; if I have, the poison is such that no antidote will
now avail; or, if they would, you well know that some griefs are of a kind
which leave no opening to any hope. What difference, therefore, can it
make whether I leave this earth to-day, to- morrow, or the next day? Be
assured of this--that whatever I have determined to do is past all power
of being affected by a human opposition. Occupy yourself not with any
fruitless attempts, but calmly listen to me, else I know what to do."
Seeing a suppressed fury in his eye, notwithstanding I saw also some
change stealing over his features as if from some subtle poison beginning

 to work upon his frame, awestruck I consented to listen, and sat still. "It
is well that you do so, for my time is short. Here is my will, legally drawn
up, and you will see that I have committed an immense property to your
discretion. Here, again, is a paper still more important in my eyes; it is
also testamentary, and binds you to duties which may not be so easy to
execute as the disposal of my property. But now listen to something else,
which concerns neither of these papers. Promise me, in the first place,
solemnly, that whenever I die you will see me buried in the same grave
as my wife, from whose funeral we are just returned. Promise."--I
promised.-- "Swear."--I swore.--"Finally, promise me that, when you read
this second paper which I have put into your hands, whatsoever you may
think of it, you will say nothing--publish nothing to the world until three
years shall have passed."--I promised.--"And now farewell for three
hours. Come to me again about ten o'clock, and take a glass of wine in
memory of old times." This he said laughingly; but even then a dark
spasm crossed his face. Yet, thinking that this might be the mere working
of mental anguish within him, I complied with his desire, and retired.
Feeling, however, but little at ease, I devised an excuse for looking in
upon him about one hour and a half after I had left him. I knocked gently
at his door; there was no answer. I knocked louder; still no answer. I
went in. The light of day was gone, and I could see nothing. But I was
alarmed by the utter stillness of the room. I listened earnestly, but not a
breath could be heard. I rushed back hastily into the hall for a lamp; I
returned; I looked in upon this marvel of manly beauty, and the first
glance informed me that he and all his splendid endowments had
departed forever. He had died, probably, soon after I left him, and had
dismissed me from some growing instinct which informed him that his last
agonies were at hand.
I took up his two testamentary documents; both were addressed in the
shape of letters to myself. The first was a rapid though distinct
appropriation of his enormous property. General rules were laid down,
upon which the property was to be distributed, but the details were left to
my discretion, and to the guidance of circumstances as they should
happen to emerge from the various inquiries which it would become
necessary to set on foot. This first document I soon laid aside, both
because I found that its provisions were dependent for their meaning
upon the second, and because to this second document I looked with

 confidence for a solution of many mysteries;--of the profound sadness
which had, from the first of my acquaintance with him, possessed a man
so gorgeously endowed as the favorite of nature and fortune; of his
motives for huddling up, in a clandestine manner, that connection which
formed the glory of his life; and possibly (but then I hesitated) of the late
unintelligible murders, which still lay under as profound a cloud as ever.
Much of this WOULD be unveiled-- all might be: and there and then, with
the corpse lying beside me of the gifted and mysterious writer, I seated
myself, and read the following statement:
"MARCH 26, 1817.
"My trial is finished; my conscience, my duty, my honor, are liberated;
my 'warfare is accomplished.' Margaret, my innocent young wife, I have
seen for the last time. Her, the crown that might have been of my earthly
felicity--her, the one temptation to put aside the bitter cup which awaited
me--her, sole seductress (O innocent seductress!) from the stern duties
which my fate had imposed upon me--her, even her, I have sacrificed.
"Before I go, partly lest the innocent should be brought into question for
acts almost exclusively mine, but still more lest the lesson and the
warning which God, by my hand, has written in blood upon your guilty
walls, should perish for want of its authentic exposition, hear my last
dying avowal, that the murders which have desolated so many families
within your walls, and made the household hearth no sanctuary, age no
charter of protection, are all due originally to my head, if not always to
my hand, as the minister of a dreadful retribution.
"That account of my history, and my prospects, which you received from
the Russian diplomatist, among some errors of little importance, is
essentially correct. My father was not so immediately connected with
English blood as is there represented. However, it is true that he claimed
descent from an English family of even higher distinction than that which
is assigned in the Russian statement. He was proud of this English
descent, and the more so as the war with revolutionary France brought
out more prominently than ever the moral and civil grandeur of England.
This pride was generous, but it was imprudent in his situation. His
immediate progenitors had been settled in Italy--at Rome first, but

 latterly at Milan; and his whole property, large and scattered, came, by
the progress of the revolution, to stand under French domination. Many
spoliations he suffered; but still he was too rich to be seriously injured.
But he foresaw, in the progress of events, still greater perils menacing his
most capital resources. Many of the states or princes in Italy were deeply
in his debt; and, in the great convulsions which threatened his country,
he saw that both the contending parties would find a colorable excuse for
absolving themselves from engagements which pressed unpleasantly
upon their finances. In this embarrassment he formed an intimacy with a
French officer of high rank and high principle. My father's friend saw his
danger, and advised him to enter the French service. In his younger days,
my father had served extensively under many princes, and had found in
every other military service a spirit of honor governing the conduct of the
officers. Here only, and for the first time, he found ruffian manners and
universal rapacity. He could not draw his sword in company with such
men, nor in such a cause. But at length, under the pressure of necessity,
he accepted (or rather bought with an immense bribe) the place of a
commissary to the French forces in Italy. With this one resource,
eventually he succeeded in making good the whole of his public claims
upon the Italian states. These vast sums he remitted, through various
channels, to England, where he became proprietor in the funds to an
immense amount. Incautiously, however, something of this transpired,
and the result was doubly unfortunate; for, while his intentions were thus
made known as finally pointing to England, which of itself made him an
object of hatred and suspicion, it also diminished his means of bribery.
These considerations, along with another, made some French officers of
high rank and influence the bitter enemies of my father. My mother,
whom he had married when holding a brigadier-general's commission in
the Austrian service, was, by birth and by religion, a Jewess. She was of
exquisite beauty, and had been sought in Morganatic marriage by an
archduke of the Austrian family; but she had relied upon this plea, that
hers was the purest and noblest blood among all Jewish families-- that
her family traced themselves, by tradition and a vast series of
attestations under the hands of the Jewish high priests, to the Maccabees,
and to the royal houses of Judea; and that for her it would be a
degradation to accept even of a sovereign prince on the terms of such
marriage. This was no vain pretension of ostentatious vanity. It was one
which had been admitted as valid for time immemorial in Transylvania

 and adjacent countries, where my mother's family were rich and honored,
and took their seat among the dignitaries of the land. The French officers
I have alluded to, without capacity for anything so dignified as a deep
passion, but merely in pursuit of a vagrant fancy that would, on the next
day, have given place to another equally fleeting, had dared to insult my
mother with proposals the most licentious--proposals as much below her
rank and birth, as, at any rate, they would have been below her dignity of
mind and her purity. These she had communicated to my father, who
bitterly resented the chains of subordination which tied up his hands from
avenging his injuries. Still his eye told a tale which his superiors could
brook as little as they could the disdainful neglect of his wife. More than
one had been concerned in the injuries to my father and mother; more
than one were interested in obtaining revenge. Things could be done in
German towns, and by favor of old German laws or usages, which even in
France could not have been tolerated. This my father's enemies well
knew, but this my father also knew; and he endeavored to lay down his
office of commissary. That, however, was a favor which he could not
obtain. He was compelled to serve on the German campaign then
commencing, and on the subsequent one of Friedland and Eylau. Here he
was caught in some one of the snares laid for him; first trepanned into an
act which violated some rule of the service; and then provoked into a
breach of discipline against the general officer who had thus trepanned
him. Now was the long-sought opportunity gained, and in that very
quarter of Germany best fitted for improving it. My father was thrown into
prison in your city, subjected to the atrocious oppression of your jailer,
and the more detestable oppression of your local laws. The charges
against him were thought even to affect his life, and he was humbled into
suing for permission to send for his wife and children. Already, to his
proud spirit, it was punishment enough that he should be reduced to sue
for favor to one of his bitterest foes. But it was no part of their plan to
refuse THAT. By way of expediting my mother's arrival, a military courier,
with every facility for the journey, was forwarded to her without delay. My
mother, her two daughters, and myself, were then residing in Venice. I
had, through the aid of my father's connections in Austria, been
appointed in the imperial service, and held a high commission for my age.
But, on my father's marching northward with the French army, I had been
recalled as an indispensable support to my mother. Not that my years
could have made me such, for I had barely accomplished my twelfth year;

 but my premature growth, and my military station, had given me
considerable knowledge of the world and presence of mind.
"Our journey I pass over; but as I approach your city, that sepulcher of
honor and happiness to my poor family, my heart beats with frantic
emotions. Never do I see that venerable dome of your minster from the
forest, but I curse its form, which reminds me of what we then surveyed
for many a mile as we traversed the forest. For leagues before we
approached the city, this object lay before us in relief upon the frosty blue
sky; and still it seemed never to increase. Such was the complaint of my
little sister Mariamne. Most innocent child! would that it never had
increased for thy eyes, but remained forever at a distance! That same
hour began the series of monstrous indignities which terminated the
career of my ill-fated family. As we drew up to the city gates, the officer
who inspected the passports, finding my mother and sisters described as
Jewesses, which in my mother's ears (reared in a region where Jews are
not dishonored) always sounded a title of distinction, summoned a
subordinate agent, who in coarse terms demanded his toll. We presumed
this to be a road tax for the carriage and horses, but we were quickly
undeceived; a small sum was demanded for each of my sisters and my
mother, as for so many head of cattle. I, fancying some mistake, spoke to
the man temperately, and, to do him justice, he did not seem desirous of
insulting us; but he produced a printed board, on which, along with the
vilest animals, Jews and Jewesses were rated at so much a head. While
we were debating the point, the officers of the gate wore a sneering smile
upon their faces-- the postilions were laughing together; and this, too, in
the presence of three creatures whose exquisite beauty, in different
styles, agreeably to their different ages, would have caused noblemen to
have fallen down and worshiped. My mother, who had never yet met with
any flagrant insult on account of her national distinctions, was too much
shocked to be capable of speaking. I whispered to her a few words,
recalling her to her native dignity of mind, paid the money, and we drove
to the prison. But the hour was past at which we could be admitted, and,
as Jewesses, my mother and sisters could not be allowed to stay in the
city; they were to go into the Jewish quarter, a part of the suburb set
apart for Jews, in which it was scarcely possible to obtain a lodging
tolerably clean. My father, on the next day, we found, to our horror, at
the point of death. To my mother he did not tell the worst of what he had

 endured. To me he told that, driven to madness by the insults offered to
him, he had upbraided the court- martial with their corrupt propensities,
and had even mentioned that overtures had been made to him for
quashing the proceedings in return for a sum of two millions of francs;
and that his sole reason for not entertaining the proposal was his distrust
of those who made it. 'They would have taken my money,' said he, 'and
then found a pretext for putting me to death, that I might tell no secrets.'
This was too near the truth to be tolerated; in concert with the local
authorities, the military enemies of my father conspired against him-witnesses were suborned; and, finally, under some antiquated law of the
place, he was subjected, in secret, to a mode of torture which still lingers
in the east of Europe.
"He sank under the torture and the degradation. I, too, thoughtlessly, but
by a natural movement of filial indignation, suffered the truth to escape
me in conversing with my mother. And she--;but I will preserve the
regular succession of things. My father died; but he had taken such
measures, in concert with me, that his enemies should never benefit by
his property. Meantime my mother and sisters had closed my father's
eyes; had attended his remains to the grave; and in every act connected
with this last sad rite had met with insults and degradations too mighty
for human patience. My mother, now become incapable of self-command,
in the fury of her righteous grief, publicly and in court denounced the
conduct of the magistracy--taxed some of them with the vilest proposals
to herself--taxed them as a body with having used instruments of torture
upon my father; and, finally, accused them of collusion with the French
military oppressors of the district. This last was a charge under which
they quailed; for by that time the French had made themselves odious to
all who retained a spark of patriotic feeling. My heart sank within me
when I looked up at the bench, this tribunal of tyrants, all purple or livid
with rage; when I looked at them alternately and at my noble mother
with her weeping daughters--these so powerless, those so basely
vindictive, and locally so omnipotent. Willingly I would have sacrificed all
my wealth for a simple permission to quit this infernal city with my poor
female relations safe and undishonored. But far other were the intentions
of that incensed magistracy. My mother was arrested, charged with some
offense equal to petty treason, or scandalum magnatum, or the sowing of
sedition; and, though what she said was true, where, alas! was she to

 look for evidence? Here was seen the want of gentlemen. Gentlemen, had
they been even equally tyrannical, would have recoiled with shame from
taking vengeance on a woman. And what a vengeance! O heavenly
powers! that I should live to mention such a thing! Man that is born of
woman, to inflict upon woman personal scourging on the bare back, and
through the streets at noonday! Even for Christian women the
punishment was severe which the laws assigned to the offense in
question. But for Jewesses, by one of the ancient laws against that
persecuted people, far heavier and more degrading punishments were
annexed to almost every offense. What else could be looked for in a city
which welcomed its Jewish guests by valuing them at its gates as brute
beasts? Sentence was passed, and the punishment was to be inflicted on
two separate days, with an interval between each-- doubtless to prolong
the tortures of mind, but under a vile pretense of alleviating the physical
torture. Three days after would come the first day of punishment. My
mother spent the time in reading her native Scriptures; she spent it in
prayer and in musing; while her daughters clung and wept around her
day and night--groveling on the ground at the feet of any people in
authority that entered their mother's cell. That same interval-- how was it
passed by me? Now mark, my friend. Every man in office, or that could
be presumed to bear the slightest influence, every wife, mother, sister,
daughter of such men, I besieged morning, noon, and night. I wearied
them with my supplications. I humbled myself to the dust; I, the
haughtiest of God's creatures, knelt and prayed to them for the sake of
my mother. I besought them that I might undergo the punishment ten
times over in her stead. And once or twice I DID obtain the
 encouragement of a few natural tears--given more, however, as I was
told, to my piety than to my mother's deserts. But rarely was I heard out
with patience; and from some houses repelled with personal indignities.
The day came: I saw my mother half undressed by the base officials; I
heard the prison gates expand; I heard the trumpets of the magistracy
sound. She had warned me what to do; I had warned myself. Would I
sacrifice a retribution sacred and comprehensive, for the momentary
triumph over an individual? If not, let me forbear to look out of doors; for
I felt that in the selfsame moment in which I saw the dog of an
executioner raise his accursed hand against my mother, swifter than the
lightning would my dagger search his heart. When I heard the roar of the
cruel mob, I paused--endured--forbore. I stole out by by-lanes of the city

 from my poor exhausted sisters, whom I left sleeping in each other's
innocent arms, into the forest. There I listened to the shouting populace;
there even I fancied that I could trace my poor mother's route by the
course of the triumphant cries. There, even then, even then, I made--O
silent forest! thou heardst me when I made--a vow that I have kept too
faithfully. Mother, thou art avenged: sleep, daughter of Jerusalem! for at
length the oppressor sleeps with thee. And thy poor son has paid, in
discharge of his vow, the forfeit of his own happiness, of a paradise
opening upon earth, of a heart as innocent as thine, and a face as fair.
"I returned, and found my mother returned. She slept by starts, but she
was feverish and agitated; and when she awoke and first saw me, she
blushed, as if I could think that real degradation had settled upon her.
Then it was that I told her of my vow. Her eyes were lambent with fierce
light for a moment; but, when I went on more eagerly to speak of my
hopes and projects, she called me to her--kissed me, and whispered: 'Oh,
not so, my son! think not of me--think not of vengeance--think only of
poor Berenice and Mariamne.' Aye, that thought WAS startling. Yet this
magnanimous and forbearing mother, as I knew by the report of our one
faithful female servant, had, in the morning, during her bitter trial,
behaved as might have become a daughter of Judas Maccabaeus: she had
looked serenely upon the vile mob, and awed even them by her serenity;
she had disdained to utter a shriek when the cruel lash fell upon her fair
skin. There is a point that makes the triumph over natural feelings of pain
easy or not easy--the degree in which we count upon the sympathy of the
bystanders. My mother had it not in the beginning; but, long before the
end, her celestial beauty, the divinity of injured innocence, the pleading of
common womanhood in the minds of the lowest class, and the reaction of
manly feeling in the men, had worked a great change in the mob. Some
began now to threaten those who had been active in insulting her. The
silence of awe and respect succeeded to noise and uproar; and feelings
which they scarcely understood, mastered the rude rabble as they
 witnessed more and more the patient fortitude of the sufferer. Menaces
began to rise toward the executioner. Things wore such an aspect that
the magistrates put a sudden end to the scene.
"That day we received permission to go home to our poor house in the
Jewish quarter. I know not whether you are learned enough in Jewish

 usages to be aware that in every Jewish house, where old traditions are
kept up, there is one room consecrated to confusion; a room always
locked up and sequestered from vulgar use, except on occasions of
memorable affliction, where everything is purposely in disorder--broken-shattered--mutilated: to typify, by symbols appalling to the eye, that
desolation which has so long trampled on Jerusalem, and the ravages of
the boar within the vineyards of Judea. My mother, as a Hebrew princess,
maintained all traditional customs. Even in this wretched suburb she had
her 'chamber of desolation.' There it was that I and my sisters heard her
last words. The rest of her sentence was to be carried into effect within a
week. She, meantime, had disdained to utter any word of fear; but that
energy of self-control had made the suffering but the more bitter. Fever
and dreadful agitation had succeeded. Her dreams showed sufficiently to
us, who watched her couch, that terror for the future mingled with the
sense of degradation for the past. Nature asserted her rights. But the
more she shrank from the suffering, the more did she proclaim how
severe it had been, and consequently how noble the self-conquest. Yet, as
her weakness increased, so did her terror; until I besought her to take
comfort, assuring her that, in case any attempt should be made to force
her out again to public exposure, I would kill the man who came to
execute the order--that we would all die together--and there would be a
common end to her injuries and her fears. She was reassured by what I
told her of my belief that no future attempt would be made upon her. She
slept more tranquilly--but her fever increased; and slowly she slept away
into the everlasting sleep which knows of no to-morrow.
"Here came a crisis in my fate. Should I stay and attempt to protect my
sisters? But, alas! what power had I to do so among our enemies?
Rachael and I consulted; and many a scheme we planned. Even while we
consulted, and the very night after my mother had been committed to the
Jewish burying ground, came an officer, bearing an order for me to repair
to Vienna. Some officer in the French army, having watched the
transaction respecting my parents, was filled with shame and grief. He
wrote a statement of the whole to an Austrian officer of rank, my father's
friend, who obtained from the emperor an order, claiming me as a page
of his own, and an officer in the household service. O heavens! what a
neglect that it did not include my sisters! However, the next best thing
was that I should use my influence at the imperial court to get them

 passed to Vienna. This I did, to the utmost of my power. But seven
months elapsed before I saw the emperor. If my applications ever met his
eye he might readily suppose that your city, my friend, was as safe a
place as another for my sisters. Nor did I myself know all its dangers. At
length, with the emperor's leave of absence, I returned. And what did I
find? Eight months had passed, and the faithful Rachael had died. The
poor sisters, clinging together, but now utterly bereft of friends, knew not
which way to turn. In this abandonment they fell into the insidious hands
of the ruffian jailer. My eldest sister, Berenice, the stateliest and noblest
of beauties, had attracted this ruffian's admiration while she was in the
prison with her mother. And when I returned to your city, armed with the
imperial passports for all, I found that Berenice had died in the villain's
custody; nor could I obtain anything beyond a legal certificate of her
death. And, finally, the blooming, laughing Mariamne, she also had died-and of affliction for the loss of her sister. You, my friend, had been absent
upon your travels during the calamitous history I have recited. You had
seen neither my father nor my mother. But you came in time to take
under your protection, from the abhorred wretch the jailer, my little
broken-hearted Mariamne. And when sometimes you fancied that you had
seen me under other circumstances, in her it was, my dear friend, and in
her features that you saw mine.
"Now was the world a desert to me. I cared little, in the way of love,
which way I turned. But in the way of hatred I cared everything. I
transferred myself to the Russian service, with the view of gaining some
appointment on the Polish frontier, which might put it in my power to
execute my vow of destroying all the magistrates of your city. War,
however, raged, and carried me into far other regions. It ceased, and
there was little prospect that another generation would see it relighted;
for the disturber of peace was a prisoner forever, and all nations were
exhausted. Now, then, it became necessary that I should adopt some new
mode for executing my vengeance; and the more so, because annually
some were dying of those whom it was my mission to punish. A voice
ascended to me, day and night, from the graves of my father and mother,
calling for vengeance before it should be too late.
I took my measures thus: Many Jews were present at Waterloo. From
among these, all irritated against Napoleon for the expectations he had

 raised, only to disappoint, by his great assembly of Jews at Paris, I
selected eight, whom I knew familiarly as men hardened by military
experience against the movements of pity. With these as my beagles, I
hunted for some time in your forest before opening my regular campaign;
and I am surprised that you did not hear of the death which met the
executioner--him I mean who dared to lift his hand against my mother.
This man I met by accident in the forest; and I slew him. I talked with the
wretch, as a stranger at first, upon the memorable case of the Jewish
lady. Had he relented, had he expressed compunction, I might have
relented. But far otherwise: the dog, not dreaming to whom he spoke,
exulted; he-- But why repeat the villain's words? I cut him to pieces. Next
I did this: My agents I caused to matriculate separately at the college.
They assumed the college dress. And now mark the solution of that
mystery which caused such perplexity. Simply as students we all had an
unsuspected admission at any house. Just then there was a common
practice, as you will remember, among the younger students, of going out
a masking--that is, of entering houses in the academic dress, and with
the face masked. This practice subsisted even during the most intense
alarm from the murderers; for the dress of the students was supposed to
bring protection along with it. But, even after suspicion had connected
itself with this dress, it was sufficient that I should appear unmasked at
the head of the maskers, to insure them a friendly reception. Hence the
facility with which death was inflicted, and that unaccountable absence of
any motion toward an alarm. I took hold of my victim, and he looked at
me with smiling security. Our weapons were hid under our academic
robes; and even when we drew them out, and at the moment of applying
them to the threat, they still supposed our gestures to be part of the
pantomime we were performing. Did I relish this abuse of personal
confidence in myself? No--I loathed it, and I grieved for its necessity; but
my mother, a phantom not seen with bodily eyes, but ever present to my
mind, continually ascended before me; and still I shouted aloud to my
astounded victim, 'This comes from the Jewess! Hound of hounds! Do you
remember the Jewess whom you dishonored, and the oaths which you
broke in order that you might dishonor her, and the righteous law which
you violated, and the cry of anguish from her son which you scoffed at?'
Who I was, what I avenged, and whom, I made every man aware, and
every woman, before I punished them. The details of the cases I need not
repeat. One or two I was obliged, at the beginning, to commit to my

 Jews. The suspicion was thus, from the first, turned aside by the notoriety
of my presence elsewhere; but I took care that none suffered who had
not either been upon the guilty list of magistrates who condemned the
mother, or of those who turned away with mockery from the supplication
of the son.
"It pleased God, however, to place a mighty temptation in my path, which
might have persuaded me to forego all thoughts of vengeance, to forget
my vow, to forget the voices which invoked me from the grave. This was
Margaret Liebenheim. Ah! how terrific appeared my duty of bloody
retribution, after her angel's face and angel's voice had calmed me. With
respect to her grandfather, strange it is to mention, that never did my
innocent wife appear so lovely as precisely in the relation of
granddaughter. So beautiful was her goodness to the old man, and so
divine was the childlike innocence on her part, contrasted with the guilty
recollections associated with him--for he was among the guiltiest toward
my mother--still I delayed HIS punishment to the last; and, for his child's
sake, I would have pardoned him--nay, I had resolved to do so, when a
fierce Jew, who had a deep malignity toward this man, swore that he
would accomplish HIS vengeance at all events, and perhaps might be
obliged to include Margaret in the ruin, unless I adhered to the original
scheme. Then I yielded; for circumstances armed this man with
momentary power. But the night fixed on was one in which I had reason
to know that my wife would be absent; for so I had myself arranged with
her, and the unhappy counter-arrangement I do not yet understand. Let
me add, that the sole purpose of my clandestine marriage was to sting
her grandfather's mind with the belief that HIS family had been
dishonored, even as he had dishonored mine. He learned, as I took care
that he should, that his granddaughter carried about with her the
promises of a mother, and did not know that she had the sanction of a
wife. This discovery made him, in one day, become eager for the
marriage he had previously opposed; and this discovery also embittered
the misery of his death. At that moment I attempted to think only of my
mother's wrongs; but, in spite of all I could do, this old man appeared to
me in the light of Margaret's grandfather--and, had I been left to myself,
he would have been saved. As it was, never was horror equal to mine
when I met her flying to his succor. I had relied upon her absence; and
the misery of that moment, when her eye fell upon me in the very act of

 seizing her grandfather, far transcended all else that I have suffered in
these terrific scenes. She fainted in my arms, and I and another carried
her upstairs and procured water. Meantime her grandfather had been
murdered, even while Margaret fainted. I had, however, under the fear of
discovery, though never anticipating a reencounter with herself,
forestalled the explanation requisite in such a case to make my conduct
intelligible. I had told her, under feigned names, the story of my mother
and my sisters. She knew their wrongs: she had heard me contend for
the right of vengeance. Consequently, in our parting interview, one word
only was required to place myself in a new position to her thoughts. I
needed only to say I was that son; that unhappy mother, so miserably
degraded and outraged, was mine.
"As to the jailer, he was met by a party of us. Not suspecting that any of
us could be connected with the family, he was led to talk of the most
hideous details with regard to my poor Berenice. The child had not, as
had been insinuated, aided her own degradation, but had nobly sustained
the dignity of her sex and her family. Such advantages as the monster
pretended to have gained over her--sick, desolate, and latterly delirious-were, by his own confession, not obtained without violence. This was too
much. Forty thousand lives, had he possessed them, could not have
gratified my thirst for revenge. Yet, had he but showed courage, he
should have died the death of a soldier. But the wretch showed cowardice
the most abject, and--,but you know his fate.
"Now, then, all is finished, and human nature is avenged. Yet, if you
complain of the bloodshed and the terror, think of the wrongs which
created my rights; think of the sacrifice by which I gave a tenfold
strength to those rights; think of the necessity for a dreadful concussion
and shock to society, in order to carry my lesson into the councils of
princes.
"This will now have been effected. And ye, victims of dishonor, will be
glorified in your deaths; ye will not have suffered in vain, nor died without
a monument. Sleep, therefore, sister Berenice--sleep, gentle Mariamne,
in peace. And thou, noble mother, let the outrages sown in thy dishonor,
rise again and blossom in wide harvests of honor for the women of thy
afflicted race. Sleep, daughters of Jerusalem, in the sanctity of your

 sufferings. And thou, if it be possible, even more beloved daughter of a
Christian fold, whose company was too soon denied to him in life, open
thy grave to receive HIM, who, in the hour of death, wishes to remember
no title which he wore on earth but that of thy chosen and adoring lover,
"MAXIMILIAN."

 
Brother Jacob
George Eliot

CHAPTER I

Among the many fatalities attending the bloom of young desire, that of
blindly taking to the confectionery line has not, perhaps, been sufficiently
considered. How is the son of a British yeoman, who has been fed
principally on salt pork and yeast dumplings, to know that there is satiety
for the human stomach even in a paradise of glass jars full of sugared
almonds and pink lozenges, and that the tedium of life can reach a pitch
where plum-buns at discretion cease to offer the slightest excitement? Or
how, at the tender age when a confectioner seems to him a very prince
whom all the world must envy--who breakfasts on macaroons, dines on
meringues, sups on twelfth-cake, and fills up the intermediate hours with
sugar-candy or peppermint--how is he to foresee the day of sad wisdom,
when he will discern that the confectioner's calling is not socially
influential, or favourable to a soaring ambition? I have known a man who
turned out to have a metaphysical genius, incautiously, in the period of
youthful buoyancy, commence his career as a dancing-master; and you
may imagine the use that was made of this initial mistake by opponents
who felt themselves bound to warn the public against his doctrine of the
Inconceivable. He could not give up his dancing-lessons, because he
made his bread by them, and metaphysics would not have found him in
so much as salt to his bread. It was really the same with Mr. David Faux
and the confectionery business. His uncle, the butler at the great house
close by Brigford, had made a pet of him in his early boyhood, and it was
on a visit to this uncle that the confectioners' shops in that brilliant town
had, on a single day, fired his tender imagination. He carried home the
pleasing illusion that a confectioner must be at once the happiest and the
foremost of men, since the things he made were not only the most
beautiful to behold, but the very best eating, and such as the Lord Mayor
must always order largely for his private recreation; so that when his
father declared he must be put to a trade, David chose his line without a
moment's hesitation; and, with a rashness inspired by a sweet tooth,

 wedded himself irrevocably to confectionery. Soon, however, the tooth
lost its relish and fell into blank indifference; and all the while, his mind
expanded, his ambition took new shapes, which could hardly be satisfied
within the sphere his youthful ardour had chosen. But what was he to do?
He was a young man of much mental activity, and, above all, gifted with
a spirit of contrivance; but then, his faculties would not tell with great
effect in any other medium than that of candied sugars, conserves, and
pastry. Say what you will about the identity of the reasoning process in all
branches of thought, or about the advantage of coming to subjects with a
fresh mind, the adjustment of butter to flour, and of heat to pastry, is not
the best preparation for the office of prime minister; besides, in the
present imperfectly-organized state of society, there are social barriers.
David could invent delightful things in the way of drop-cakes, and he had
the widest views of the sugar department; but in other directions he
certainly felt hampered by the want of knowledge and practical skill; and
the world is so inconveniently constituted, that the vague consciousness
of being a fine fellow is no guarantee of success in any line of business.
This difficulty pressed with some severity on Mr. David Faux, even before
his apprenticeship was ended. His soul swelled with an impatient sense
that he ought to become something very remarkable--that it was quite
out of the question for him to put up with a narrow lot as other men did:
he scorned the idea that he could accept an average. He was sure there
was nothing average about him: even such a person as Mrs. Tibbits, the
washer- woman, perceived it, and probably had a preference for his linen.
At that particular period he was weighing out gingerbread nuts; but such
an anomaly could not continue. No position could be suited to Mr. David
Faux that was not in the highest degree easy to the flesh and flattering to
the spirit. If he had fallen on the present times, and enjoyed the
advantages of a Mechanic's Institute, he would certainly have taken to
literature and have written reviews; but his education had not been
liberal. He had read some novels from the adjoining circulating library,
and had even bought the story of Inkle and Yarico, which had made him
feel very sorry for poor Mr. Inkle; so that his ideas might not have been
below a certain mark of the literary calling; but his spelling and diction
were too unconventional.

 When a man is not adequately appreciated or comfortably placed in his
own country, his thoughts naturally turn towards foreign climes; and
David's imagination circled round and round the utmost limits of his
geographical knowledge, in search of a country where a young gentleman
of pasty visage, lipless mouth, and stumpy hair, would be likely to be
received with the hospitable enthusiasm which he had a right to expect.
Having a general idea of America as a country where the population was
chiefly black, it appeared to him the most propitious destination for an
emigrant who, to begin with, had the broad and easily recognizable merit
of whiteness; and this idea gradually took such strong possession of him
that Satan seized the opportunity of suggesting to him that he might
emigrate under easier circumstances, if he supplied himself with a little
money from his master's till. But that evil spirit, whose understanding, I
am convinced, has been much overrated, quite wasted his time on this
occasion. David would certainly have liked well to have some of his
master's money in his pocket, if he had been sure his master would have
been the only man to suffer for it; but he was a cautious youth, and quite
determined to run no risks on his own account. So he stayed out his
apprenticeship, and committed no act of dishonesty that was at all likely
to be discovered, reserving his plan of emigration for a future
opportunity. And the circumstances under which he carried it out were in
this wise. Having been at home a week or two partaking of the family
beans, he had used his leisure in ascertaining a fact which was of
considerable importance to him, namely, that his mother had a small sum
in guineas painfully saved from her maiden perquisites, and kept in the
corner of a drawer where her baby-linen had reposed for the last twenty
years--ever since her son David had taken to his feet, with a slight
promise of bow-legs which had not been altogether unfulfilled. Mr. Faux,
senior, had told his son very frankly, that he must not look to being set
up in business by him: with seven sons, and one of them a very healthy
and well-developed idiot, who consumed a dumpling about eight inches in
diameter every day, it was pretty well if they got a hundred apiece at his
death. Under these circumstances, what was David to do? It was certainly
hard that he should take his mother's money; but he saw no other ready
means of getting any, and it was not to be expected that a young man of
his merit should put up with inconveniences that could be avoided.
Besides, it is not robbery to take property belonging to your mother: she
doesn't prosecute you. And David was very well behaved to his mother;

 he comforted her by speaking highly of himself to her, and assuring her
that he never fell into the vices he saw practised by other youths of his
own age, and that he was particularly fond of honesty. If his mother
would have given him her twenty guineas as a reward of this noble
disposition, he really would not have stolen them from her, and it would
have been more agreeable to his feelings. Nevertheless, to an active mind
like David's, ingenuity is not without its pleasures: it was rather an
interesting occupation to become stealthily acquainted with the wards of
his mother's simple key (not in the least like Chubb's patent), and to get
one that would do its work equally well; and also to arrange a little drama
by which he would escape suspicion, and run no risk of forfeiting the
prospective hundred at his father's death, which would be convenient in
the improbable case of his not making a large fortune in the "Indies."
First, he spoke freely of his intention to start shortly for Liverpool and
take ship for America; a resolution which cost his good mother some pain,
for, after Jacob the idiot, there was not one of her sons to whom her
heart clung more than to her youngest-born, David. Next, it appeared to
him that Sunday afternoon, when everybody was gone to church except
Jacob and the cowboy, was so singularly favourable an opportunity for
sons who wanted to appropriate their mothers' guineas, that he half
thought it must have been kindly intended by Providence for such
purposes. Especially the third Sunday in Lent; because Jacob had been
out on one of his occasional wanderings for the last two days; and David,
being a timid young man, had a considerable dread and hatred of Jacob,
as of a large personage who went about habitually with a pitchfork in his
hand.
Nothing could be easier, then, than for David on this Sunday afternoon to
decline going to church, on the ground that he was going to tea at Mr.
Lunn's, whose pretty daughter Sally had been an early flame of his, and,
when the church-goers were at a safe distance, to abstract the guineas
from their wooden box and slip them into a small canvas bag--nothing
easier than to call to the cowboy that he was going, and tell him to keep
an eye on the house for fear of Sunday tramps. David thought it would be
easy, too, to get to a small thicket and bury his bag in a hole he had
already made and covered up under the roots of an old hollow ash, and
he had, in fact, found the hole without a moment's difficulty, had

 uncovered it, and was about gently to drop the bag into it, when the
sound of a large body rustling towards him with something like a bellow
was such a surprise to David, who, as a gentleman gifted with much
contrivance, was naturally only prepared for what he expected, that
instead of dropping the bag gently he let it fall so as to make it untwist
and vomit forth the shining guineas. In the same moment he looked up
and saw his dear brother Jacob close upon him, holding the pitchfork so
that the bright smooth prongs were a yard in advance of his own body,
and about a foot off David's. (A learned friend, to whom I once narrated
this history, observed that it was David's guilt which made these prongs
formidable, and that the "mens nil conscia sibi" strips a pitchfork of all
terrors. I thought this idea so valuable, that I obtained his leave to use it
on condition of suppressing his name.) Nevertheless, David did not
entirely lose his presence of mind; for in that case he would have sunk on
the earth or started backward; whereas he kept his ground and smiled at
Jacob, who nodded his head up and down, and said, "Hoich, Zavy!" in a
painfully equivocal manner. David's heart was beating audibly, and if he
had had any lips they would have been pale; but his mental activity,
instead of being paralysed, was stimulated. While he was inwardly
praying (he always prayed when he was much frightened)--"Oh, save me
this once, and I'll never get into danger again!"--he was thrusting his
hand into his pocket in search of a box of yellow lozenges, which he had
brought with him from Brigford among other delicacies of the same
portable kind, as a means of conciliating proud beauty, and more
particularly the beauty of Miss Sarah Lunn. Not one of these delicacies
had he ever offered to poor Jacob, for David was not a young man to
waste his jujubes and barley-sugar in giving pleasure to people from
whom he expected nothing. But an idiot with equivocal intentions and a
pitchfork is as well worth flattering and cajoling as if he were Louis
Napoleon. So David, with a promptitude equal to the occasion, drew out
his box of yellow lozenges, lifted the lid, and performed a pantomime with
his mouth and fingers, which was meant to imply that he was delighted to
see his dear brother Jacob, and seized the opportunity of making him a
small present, which he would find particularly agreeable to the taste.
Jacob, you understand, was not an intense idiot, but within a certain
limited range knew how to choose the good and reject the evil: he took
one lozenge, by way of test, and sucked it as if he had been a
philosopher; then, in as great an ecstacy at its new and complex savour

 as Caliban at the taste of Trinculo's wine, chuckled and stroked this
suddenly beneficent brother, and held out his hand for more; for, except
in fits of anger, Jacob was not ferocious or needlessly predatory. David's
courage half returned, and he left off praying; pouring a dozen lozenges
into Jacob's palm, and trying to look very fond of him. He congratulated
himself that he had formed the plan of going to see Miss Sally Lunn this
afternoon, and that, as a consequence, he had brought with him these
propitiatory delicacies: he was certainly a lucky fellow; indeed, it was
always likely Providence should be fonder of him than of other
apprentices, and since he was to be interrupted, why, an idiot was
preferable to any other sort of witness. For the first time in his life, David
thought he saw the advantage of idiots.
As for Jacob, he had thrust his pitchfork into the ground, and had thrown
himself down beside it, in thorough abandonment to the unprecedented
pleasure of having five lozenges in his mouth at once, blinking
meanwhile, and making inarticulate sounds of gustative content. He had
not yet given any sign of noticing the guineas, but in seating himself he
had laid his broad right hand on them, and unconsciously kept it in that
position, absorbed in the sensations of his palate. If he could only be kept
so occupied with the lozenges as not to see the guineas before David
could manage to cover them! That was David's best hope of safety; for
Jacob knew his mother's guineas; it had been part of their common
experience as boys to be allowed to look at these handsome coins, and
rattle them in their box on high days and holidays, and among all Jacob's
narrow experiences as to money, this was likely to be the most
memorable.
"Here, Jacob," said David, in an insinuating tone, handing the box to him,
"I'll give 'em all to you. Run!--make haste!--else somebody'll come and
take 'em."
David, not having studied the psychology of idiots, was not aware that
they are not to be wrought upon by imaginative fears. Jacob took the box
with his left hand, but saw no necessity for running away. Was ever a
promising young man wishing to lay the foundation of his fortune by
appropriating his mother's guineas obstructed by such a day-mare as
this? But the moment must come when Jacob would move his right hand

 to draw off the lid of the tin box, and then David would sweep the guineas
into the hole with the utmost address and swiftness, and immediately
seat himself upon them. Ah, no! It's of no use to have foresight when you
are dealing with an idiot: he is not to be calculated upon. Jacob's right
hand was given to vague clutching and throwing; it suddenly clutched the
guineas as if they had been so many pebbles, and was raised in an
attitude which promised to scatter them like seed over a distant bramble,
when, from some prompting or other--probably of an unwonted
sensation--it paused, descended to Jacob's knee, and opened slowly
under the inspection of Jacob's dull eyes. David began to pray again, but
immediately desisted--another resource having occurred to him.
"Mother! zinnies!" exclaimed the innocent Jacob. Then, looking at David,
he said, interrogatively, "Box?"
"Hush! hush!" said David, summoning all his ingenuity in this severe
strait. "See, Jacob!" He took the tin box from his brother's hand, and
emptied it of the lozenges, returning half of them to Jacob, but secretly
keeping the rest in his own hand. Then he held out the empty box, and
said, "Here's the box, Jacob! The box for the guineas!" gently sweeping
them from Jacob's palm into the box.
This procedure was not objectionable to Jacob; on the contrary, the
guineas clinked so pleasantly as they fell, that he wished for a repetition
of the sound, and seizing the box, began to rattle it very gleefully. David,
seizing the opportunity, deposited his reserve of lozenges in the ground
and hastily swept some earth over them. "Look, Jacob!" he said, at last.
Jacob paused from his clinking, and looked into the hole, while David
began to scratch away the earth, as if in doubtful expectation. When the
lozenges were laid bare, he took them out one by one, and gave them to
Jacob. "Hush!" he said, in a loud whisper, "Tell nobody--all for Jacob-hush--sh--sh! Put guineas in the hole--they'll come out like this!" To
make the lesson more complete, he took a guinea, and lowering it into
the hole, said, "Put in so." Then, as he took the last lozenge out, he said,
"Come out so," and put the lozenge into Jacob's hospitable mouth.
Jacob turned his head on one side, looked first at his brother and then at
the hole, like a reflective monkey, and, finally, laid the box of guineas in

 the hole with much decision. David made haste to add every one of the
stray coins, put on the lid, and covered it well with earth, saying in his
meet coaxing tone-"Take 'm out to-morrow, Jacob; all for Jacob! Hush--sh--sh!"
Jacob, to whom this once indifferent brother had all at once become a
sort of sweet-tasted fetish, stroked David's best coat with his adhesive
fingers, and then hugged him with an accompaniment of that mingled
chuckling and gurgling by which he was accustomed to express the milder
passions. But if he had chosen to bite a small morsel out of his beneficent
brother's cheek, David would have been obliged to bear it.
And here I must pause, to point out to you the short-sightedness of
human contrivance. This ingenious young man, Mr. David Faux, thought
he had achieved a triumph of cunning when he had associated himself in
his brother's rudimentary mind with the flavour of yellow lozenges. But he
had yet to learn that it is a dreadful thing to make an idiot fond of you,
when you yourself are not of an affectionate disposition: especially an
idiot with a pitchfork--obviously a difficult friend to shake off by rough
usage.
It may seem to you rather a blundering contrivance for a clever young
man to bury the guineas. But, if everything had turned out as David had
calculated, you would have seen that his plan was worthy of his talents.
The guineas would have lain safely in the earth while the theft was
discovered, and David, with the calm of conscious innocence, would have
lingered at home, reluctant to say good-bye to his dear mother while she
was in grief about her guineas; till at length, on the eve of his departure,
he would have disinterred them in the strictest privacy, and carried them
on his own person without inconvenience. But David, you perceive, had
reckoned without his host, or, to speak more precisely, without his idiot
brother--an item of so uncertain and fluctuating a character, that I doubt
whether he would not have puzzled the astute heroes of M. de Balzac,
whose foresight is so remarkably at home in the future.
It was clear to David now that he had only one alternative before him: he
must either renounce the guineas, by quietly putting them back in his

 mother's drawer (a course not unattended with difficulty); or he must
leave more than a suspicion behind him, by departing early the next
morning without giving notice, and with the guineas in his pocket. For if
he gave notice that he was going, his mother, he knew, would insist on
fetching from her box of guineas the three she had always promised him
as his share; indeed, in his original plan, he had counted on this as a
means by which the theft would be discovered under circumstances that
would themselves speak for his innocence; but now, as I need hardly
explain, that well-combined plan was completely frustrated. Even if David
could have bribed Jacob with perpetual lozenges, an idiot's secrecy is
itself betrayal. He dared not even go to tea at Mr. Lunn's, for in that case
he would have lost sight of Jacob, who, in his impatience for the crop of
lozenges, might scratch up the box again while he was absent, and carry
it home--depriving him at once of reputation and guineas. No! he must
think of nothing all the rest of this day, but of coaxing Jacob and keeping
him out of mischief. It was a fatiguing and anxious evening to David;
nevertheless, he dared not go to sleep without tying a piece of string to
his thumb and great toe, to secure his frequent waking; for he meant to
be up with the first peep of dawn, and be far out of reach before
breakfast-time. His father, he thought, would certainly cut him off with a
shilling; but what then? Such a striking young man as he would be sure to
be well received in the West Indies: in foreign countries there are always
openings--even for cats. It was probable that some Princess Yarico would
want him to marry her, and make him presents of very large jewels
beforehand; after which, he needn't marry her unless he liked. David had
made up his mind not to steal any more, even from people who were fond
of him: it was an unpleasant way of making your fortune in a world where
you were likely to surprised in the act by brothers. Such alarms did not
agree with David's constitution, and he had felt so much nausea this
evening that no doubt his liver was affected. Besides, he would have been
greatly hurt not to be thought well of in the world: he always meant to
make a figure, and be thought worthy of the best seats and the best
morsels.
Ruminating to this effect on the brilliant future in reserve for him, David
by the help of his check-string kept himself on the alert to seize the time
of earliest dawn for his rising and departure. His brothers, of course, were
early risers, but he should anticipate them by at least an hour and a half,

 and the little room which he had to himself as only an occasional visitor,
had its window over the horse-block, so that he could slip out through the
window without the least difficulty. Jacob, the horrible Jacob, had an
awkward trick of getting up before everybody else, to stem his hunger by
emptying the milk-bowl that was "duly set" for him; but of late he had
taken to sleeping in the hay-loft, and if he came into the house, it would
be on the opposite side to that from which David was making his exit.
There was no need to think of Jacob; yet David was liberal enough to
bestow a curse on him--it was the only thing he ever did bestow
gratuitously. His small bundle of clothes was ready packed, and he was
soon treading lightly on the steps of the horse-block, soon walking at a
smart pace across the fields towards the thicket. It would take him no
more than two minutes to get out the box; he could make out the tree it
was under by the pale strip where the bark was off, although the dawning
light was rather dimmer in the thicket. But what, in the name of--burnt
pastry--was that large body with a staff planted beside it, close at the foot
of the ash-tree? David paused, not to make up his mind as to the nature
of the apparition--he had not the happiness of doubting for a moment
that the staff was Jacob's pitchfork--but to gather the self-command
necessary for addressing his brother with a sufficiently honeyed accent.
Jacob was absorbed in scratching up the earth, and had not heard David's
approach.
"I say, Jacob," said David in a loud whisper, just as the tin box was lifted
out of the hole.
Jacob looked up, and discerning his sweet-flavoured brother, nodded and
grinned in the dim light in a way that made him seem to David like a
triumphant demon. If he had been of an impetuous disposition, he would
have snatched the pitchfork from the ground and impaled this fraternal
demon. But David was by no means impetuous; he was a young man
greatly given to calculate consequences, a habit which has been held to
be the foundation of virtue. But somehow it had not precisely that effect
in David: he calculated whether an action would harm himself, or whether
it would only harm other people. In the former case he was very timid
about satisfying his immediate desires, but in the latter he would risk the
result with much courage.

 "Give it me, Jacob," he said, stooping down and patting his brother. "Let
us see."
Jacob, finding the lid rather tight, gave the box to his brother in perfect
faith. David raised the lids and shook his head, while Jacob put his finger
in and took out a guinea to taste whether the metamorphosis into
lozenges was complete and satisfactory.
"No, Jacob; too soon, too soon," said David, when the guinea had been
tasted. "Give it me; we'll go and bury it somewhere else; we'll put it in
yonder," he added, pointing vaguely toward the distance.
David screwed on the lid, while Jacob, looking grave, rose and grasped his
pitchfork. Then, seeing David's bundle, he snatched it, like a too officious
Newfoundland, stuck his pitchfork into it and carried it over his shoulder
in triumph as he accompanied David and the box out of the thicket.
What on earth was David to do? It would have been easy to frown at
Jacob, and kick him, and order him to get away; but David dared as soon
have kicked the bull. Jacob was quiet as long as he was treated
indulgently; but on the slightest show of anger, he became
unmanageable, and was liable to fits of fury which would have made him
formidable even without his pitchfork. There was no mastery to be
obtained over him except by kindness or guile. David tried guile.
"Go, Jacob," he said, when they were out of the thicket--pointing towards
the house as he spoke; "go and fetch me a spade--a spade. But give me
the bundle," he added, trying to reach it from the fork, where it hung high
above Jacob's tall shoulder.
But Jacob showed as much alacrity in obeying as a wasp shows in leaving
a sugar-basin. Near David, he felt himself in the vicinity of lozenges: he
chuckled and rubbed his brother's back, brandishing the bundle higher out
of reach. David, with an inward groan, changed his tactics, and walked on
as fast as he could. It was not safe to linger. Jacob would get tired of
following him, or, at all events, could be eluded. If they could once get to
the distant highroad, a coach would overtake them, David would mount it,
having previously by some ingenious means secured his bundle, and then

 Jacob might howl and flourish his pitchfork as much as he liked.
Meanwhile he was under the fatal necessity of being very kind to this
ogre, and of providing a large breakfast for him when they stopped at a
roadside inn. It was already three hours since they had started, and David
was tired. Would no coach be coming up soon? he inquired. No coach for
the next two hours. But there was a carrier's cart to come immediately,
on its way to the next town. If he could slip out, even leaving his bundle
behind, and get into the cart without Jacob! But there was a new
obstacle. Jacob had recently discovered a remnant of sugar-candy in one
of his brother's tail-pockets; and, since then, had cautiously kept his hold
on that limb of the garment, perhaps with an expectation that there
would be a further development of sugar-candy after a longer or shorter
interval. Now every one who has worn a coat will understand the
sensibilities that must keep a man from starting away in a hurry when
there is a grasp on his coat-tail. David looked forward to being well
received among strangers, but it might make a difference if he had only
one tail to his coat.
He felt himself in a cold perspiration. He could walk no more: he must get
into the cart and let Jacob get in with him. Presently a cheering idea
occurred to him: after so large a breakfast, Jacob would be sure to go to
sleep in the cart; you see at once that David meant to seize his bundle,
jump out, and be free. His expectation was partly fulfilled: Jacob did go to
sleep in the cart, but it was in a peculiar attitude--it was with his arms
tightly fastened round his dear brother's body; and if ever David
attempted to move, the grasp tightened with the force of an affectionate
boa-constrictor.
"Th' innicent's fond on you," observed the carrier, thinking that David was
probably an amiable brother, and wishing to pay him a compliment.
David groaned. The ways of thieving were not ways of pleasantness. Oh,
why had he an idiot brother? Oh, why, in general, was the world so
constituted that a man could not take his mother's guineas comfortably?
David became grimly speculative.
Copious dinner at noon for Jacob; but little dinner, because little appetite,
for David. Instead of eating, he plied Jacob with beer; for through this

 liberality he descried a hope. Jacob fell into a dead sleep, at last, without
having his arms round David, who paid the reckoning, took his bundle,
and walked off. In another half-hour he was on the coach on his way to
Liverpool, smiling the smile of the triumphant wicked. He was rid of
Jacob--he was bound for the Indies, where a gullible princess awaited
him. He would never steal any more, but there would be no need; he
would show himself so deserving, that people would make him presents
freely. He must give up the notion of his father's legacy; but it was not
likely he would ever want that trifle; and even if he did--why, it was a
compensation to think that in being for ever divided from his family he
was divided from Jacob, more terrible than Gorgon or Demogorgon to
David's timid green eyes. Thank heaven, he should never see Jacob any
more!

CHAPTER II

It was nearly six years after the departure of Mr. David Faux for the West
Indies, that the vacant shop in the market-place at Grimworth was
understood to have been let to the stranger with a sallow complexion and
a buff cravat, whose first appearance had caused some excitement in the
bar of the Woolpack, where he had called to wait for the coach.
Grimworth, to a discerning eye, was a good place to set up shopkeeping
in. There was no competition in it at present; the Church-people had their
own grocer and draper; the Dissenters had theirs; and the two or three
butchers found a ready market for their joints without strict reference to
religious persuasion--except that the rector's wife had given a general
order for the veal sweet-breads and the mutton kidneys, while Mr. Rodd,
the Baptist minister, had requested that, so far as was compatible with
the fair accommodation of other customers, the sheep's trotters might be
reserved for him. And it was likely to be a growing place, for the trustees
of Mr. Zephaniah Crypt's Charity, under the stimulus of a late visitation by
commissioners, were beginning to apply long-accumulating funds to the
rebuilding of the Yellow Coat School, which was henceforth to be carried
forward on a greatly-extended scale, the testator having left no
restrictions concerning the curriculum, but only concerning the coat.

 The shopkeepers at Grimworth were by no means unanimous as to the
advantages promised by this prospect of increased population and
trading, being substantial men, who liked doing a quiet business in which
they were sure of their customers, and could calculate their returns to a
nicety. Hitherto, it had been held a point of honour by the families in
Grimworth parish, to buy their sugar and their flannel at the shop where
their fathers and mothers had bought before them; but, if newcomers
were to bring in the system of neck-and-neck trading, and solicit feminine
eyes by gown-pieces laid in fan-like folds, and surmounted by artificial
flowers, giving them a factitious charm (for on what human figure would a
gown sit like a fan, or what female head was like a bunch of Chinaasters?), or, if new grocers were to fill their windows with mountains of
currants and sugar, made seductive by contrast and tickets,--what
security was there for Grimworth, that a vagrant spirit in shopping, once
introduced, would not in the end carry the most important families to the
larger market town of Cattleton, where, business being done on a system
of small profits and quick returns, the fashions were of the freshest, and
goods of all kinds might be bought at an advantage?
With this view of the times predominant among the tradespeople at
Grimworth, their uncertainty concerning the nature of the business which
the sallow-complexioned stranger was about to set up in the vacant shop,
naturally gave some additional strength to the fears of the less sanguine.
If he was going to sell drapery, it was probable that a pale- faced fellow
like that would deal in showy and inferior articles--printed cottons and
muslins which would leave their dye in the wash-tub, jobbed linen full of
knots, and flannel that would soon look like gauze. If grocery, then it was
to be hoped that no mother of a family would trust the teas of an untried
grocer. Such things had been known in some parishes as tradesmen
going about canvassing for custom with cards in their pockets: when
people came from nobody knew where, there was no knowing what they
might do. It was a thousand pities that Mr. Moffat, the auctioneer and
broker, had died without leaving anybody to follow him in the business,
and Mrs. Cleve's trustee ought to have known better than to let a shop to
a stranger. Even the discovery that ovens were being put up on the
premises, and that the shop was, in fact, being fitted up for a confectioner
and pastry-cook's business, hitherto unknown in Grimworth, did not quite

 suffice to turn the scale in the newcomer's favour, though the landlady at
the Woolpack defended him warmly, said he seemed to be a very clever
young man, and from what she could make out, came of a very good
family; indeed, was most likely a good many people's betters.
It certainly made a blaze of light and colour, almost as if a rainbow had
suddenly descended into the market-place, when, one fine morning, the
shutters were taken down from the new shop, and the two windows
displayed their decorations. On one side, there were the variegated tints
of collared and marbled meats, set off by bright green leaves, the pale
brown of glazed pies, the rich tones of sauces and bottled fruits enclosed
in their veil of glass--altogether a sight to bring tears into the eyes of a
Dutch painter; and on the other, there was a predominance of the more
delicate hues of pink, and white, and yellow, and buff, in the abundant
lozenges, candies, sweet biscuits and icings, which to the eyes of a bilious
person might easily have been blended into a faery landscape in Turner's
latest style. What a sight to dawn upon the eyes of Grimworth children!
They almost forgot to go to their dinner that day, their appetites being
preoccupied with imaginary sugar-plums; and I think even Punch, setting
up his tabernacle in the market-place, would not have succeeded in
drawing them away from those shop-windows, where they stood
according to gradations of size and strength, the biggest and strongest
being nearest the window, and the little ones in the outermost rows lifting
wide-open eyes and mouths towards the upper tier of jars, like small
birds at meal-time.
The elder inhabitants pished and pshawed a little at the folly of the new
shopkeeper in venturing on such an outlay in goods that would not keep;
to be sure, Christmas was coming, but what housewife in Grimworth
would not think shame to furnish forth her table with articles that were
not home-cooked? No, no. Mr. Edward Freely, as he called himself, was
deceived, if he thought Grimworth money was to flow into his pockets on
such terms.
Edward Freely was the name that shone in gilt letters on a mazarine
ground over the doorplace of the new shop--a generous-sounding name,
that might have belonged to the open-hearted, improvident hero of an old
comedy, who would have delighted in raining sugared almonds, like a new

 manna-gift, among that small generation outside the windows. But Mr.
Edward Freely was a man whose impulses were kept in due
subordination: he held that the desire for sweets and pastry must only be
satisfied in a direct ratio with the power of paying for them. If the
smallest child in Grimworth would go to him with a halfpenny in its tiny
fist, he would, after ringing the halfpenny, deliver a just equivalent in
"rock." He was not a man to cheat even the smallest child--he often said
so, observing at the same time that he loved honesty, and also that he
was very tender- hearted, though he didn't show his feelings as some
people did.
Either in reward of such virtue, or according to some more hidden law of
sequence, Mr. Freely's business, in spite of prejudice, started under
favourable auspices. For Mrs. Chaloner, the rector's wife, was among the
earliest customers at the shop, thinking it only right to encourage a new
parishioner who had made a decorous appearance at church; and she
found Mr. Freely a most civil, obliging young man, and intelligent to a
surprising degree for a confectioner; well-principled, too, for in giving her
useful hints about choosing sugars he had thrown much light on the
dishonesty of other tradesmen. Moreover, he had been in the West
Indies, and had seen the very estate which had been her poor
grandfather's property; and he said the missionaries were the only cause
of the negro's discontent--an observing young man, evidently. Mrs.
Chaloner ordered wine-biscuits and olives, and gave Mr. Freely to
understand that she should find his shop a great convenience. So did the
doctor's wife, and so did Mrs. Gate, at the large carding-mill, who, having
high connexions frequently visiting her, might be expected to have a large
consumption of ratafias and macaroons.
The less aristocratic matrons of Grimworth seemed likely at first to justify
their husbands' confidence that they would never pay a percentage of
profits on drop-cakes, instead of making their own, or get up a hollow
show of liberal housekeeping by purchasing slices of collared meat when a
neighbour came in for supper. But it is my task to narrate the gradual
corruption of Grimworth manners from their primitive simplicity--a
melancholy task, if it were not cheered by the prospect of the fine
peripateia or downfall by which the progress of the corruption was
ultimately checked.

 It was young Mrs. Steene, the veterinary surgeons wife, who first gave
way to temptation. I fear she had been rather over-educated for her
station in life, for she knew by heart many passages in Lalla Rookh, the
Corsair, and the Siege of Corinth, which had given her a distaste for
domestic occupations, and caused her a withering disappointment at the
discovery that Mr. Steene, since his marriage, had lost all interest in the
"bulbul," openly preferred discussing the nature of spavin with a coarse
neighbour, and was angry if the pudding turned out watery--indeed, was
simply a top-booted "vet.", who came in hungry at dinner-time; and not
in the least like a nobleman turned Corsair out of pure scorn for his race,
or like a renegade with a turban and crescent, unless it were in the
irritability of his temper. And scorn is such a very different thing in topboots!
This brutal man had invited a supper-party for Christmas eve, when he
would expect to see mince-pies on the table. Mrs. Steene had prepared
her mince-meat, and had devoted much butter, fine flour, and labour, to
the making of a batch of pies in the morning; but they proved to be so
very heavy when they came out of the oven, that she could only think
with trembling of the moment when her husband should catch sight of
them on the supper-table. He would storm at her, she was certain; and
before all the company; and then she should never help crying: it was so
dreadful to think she had come to that, after the bulbul and everything!
Suddenly the thought darted through her mind that this once she might
send for a dish of mince-pies from Freely's: she knew he had some. But
what was to become of the eighteen heavy mince-pies? Oh, it was of no
use thinking about that; it was very expensive--indeed, making mincepies at all was a great expense, when they were not sure to turn out well:
it would be much better to buy them ready-made. You paid a little more
for them, but there was no risk of waste.
Such was the sophistry with which this misguided young woman--enough.
Mrs. Steene sent for the mince-pies, and, I am grieved to add, garbled
her household accounts in order to conceal the fact from her husband.
This was the second step in a downward course, all owing to a young
woman's being out of harmony with her circumstances, yearning after
renegades and bulbuls, and being subject to claims from a veterinary

 surgeon fond of mince-pies. The third step was to harden herself by
telling the fact of the bought mince-pies to her intimate friend Mrs. Mole,
who had already guessed it, and who subsequently encouraged herself in
buying a mould of jelly, instead of exerting her own skill, by the reflection
that "other people" did the same sort of thing. The infection spread; soon
there was a party or clique in Grimworth on the side of "buying at
Freely's"; and many husbands, kept for some time in the dark on this
point, innocently swallowed at two mouthfuls a tart on which they were
paying a profit of a hundred per cent., and as innocently encouraged a
fatal disingenuousness in the partners of their bosoms by praising the
pastry. Others, more keen-sighted, winked at the too frequent
presentation on washing-days, and at impromptu suppers, of superior
spiced-beef, which flattered their palates more than the cold remnants
they had formerly been contented with. Every housewife who had once
"bought at Freely's" felt a secret joy when she detected a similar
perversion in her neighbour's practice, and soon only two or three oldfashioned mistresses of families held out in the protest against the
growing demoralization, saying to their neighbours who came to sup with
them, "I can't offer you Freely's beef, or Freely's cheesecakes; everything
in our house is home-made; I'm afraid you'll hardly have any appetite for
our plain pastry." The doctor, whose cook was not satisfactory, the
curate, who kept no cook, and the mining agent, who was a great bon
vivant, even began to rely on Freely for the greater part of their dinner,
when they wished to give an entertainment of some brilliancy. In short,
the business of manufacturing the more fanciful viands was fast passing
out of the hinds of maids and matrons in private families, and was
becoming the work of a special commercial organ.
I am not ignorant that this sort of thing is called the inevitable course of
civilization, division of labour, and so forth, and that the maids and
matrons may be said to have had their hands set free from cookery to
add to the wealth of society in some other way. Only it happened at
Grimworth, which, to be sure, was a low place, that the maids and
matrons could do nothing with their hands at all better than cooking: not
even those who had always made heavy cakes and leathery pastry. And
so it came to pass, that the progress of civilization at Grimworth was not
otherwise apparent than in the impoverishment of men, the gossiping
idleness of women, and the heightening prosperity of Mr. Edward Freely.

 The Yellow Coat School was a double source of profit to the calculating
confectioner; for he opened an eating-room for the superior workmen
employed on the new school, and he accommodated the pupils at the old
school by giving great attention to the fancy-sugar department. When I
think of the sweet-tasted swans and other ingenious white shapes
crunched by the small teeth of that rising generation, I am glad to
remember that a certain amount of calcareous food has been held good
for young creatures whose bones are not quite formed; for I have
observed these delicacies to have an inorganic flavour which would have
recommended them greatly to that young lady of the Spectator's
acquaintance who habitually made her dessert on the stems of tobaccopipes.
As for the confectioner himself, he made his way gradually into Grimworth
homes, as his commodities did, in spite of some initial repugnance.
Somehow or other, his reception as a guest seemed a thing that required
justifying, like the purchasing of his pastry. In the first place, he was a
stranger, and therefore open to suspicion; secondly, the confectionery
business was so entirely new at Grimworth, that its place in the scale of
rank had not been distinctly ascertained. There was no doubt about
drapers and grocers, when they came of good old Grimworth families, like
Mr. Luff and Mr. Prettyman: they visited with the Palfreys, who farmed
their own land, played many a game at whist with the doctor, and
condescended a little towards the timber-merchant, who had lately taken
to the coal-trade also, and had got new furniture; but whether a
confectioner should be admitted to this higher level of respectability, or
should be understood to find his associates among butchers and bakers,
was a new question on which tradition threw no light. His being a
bachelor was in his favour, and would perhaps have been enough to turn
the scale, even if Mr. Edward Freely's other personal pretensions had
been of an entirely insignificant cast. But so far from this, it very soon
appeared that he was a remarkable young man, who had been in the
West Indies, and had seen many wonders by sea and land, so that he
could charm the ears of Grimworth Desdemonas with stories of strange
fishes, especially sharks, which he had stabbed in the nick of time by
bravely plunging overboard just as the monster was turning on his side to
devour the cook's mate; of terrible fevers which he had undergone in a

 land where the wind blows from all quarters at once; of rounds of toast
cut straight from the breadfruit trees; of toes bitten off by land- crabs; of
large honours that had been offered to him as a man who knew what was
what, and was therefore particularly needed in a tropical climate; and of a
Creole heiress who had wept bitterly at his departure. Such
conversational talents as these, we know, will overcome disadvantages of
complexion; and young Towers, whose cheeks were of the finest pink, set
off by a fringe of dark whisker, was quite eclipsed by the presence of the
sallow Mr. Freely. So exceptional a confectioner elevated the business,
and might well begin to make disengaged hearts flutter a little.
Fathers and mothers were naturally more slow and cautious in their
recognition of the newcomer's merits.
"He's an amusing fellow," said Mr. Prettyman, the highly respectable
grocer. (Mrs. Prettyman was a Miss Fothergill, and her sister had married
a London mercer.) "He's an amusing fellow; and I've no objection to his
making one at the Oyster Club; but he's a bit too fond of riding the high
horse. He's uncommonly knowing, I'll allow; but how came he to go to the
Indies? I should like that answered. It's unnatural in a confectioner. I'm
not fond of people that have been beyond seas, if they can't give a good
account how they happened to go. When folks go so far off, it's because
they've got little credit nearer home--that's my opinion. However, he's
got some good rum; but I don't want to be hand and glove with him, for
all that."
It was this kind of dim suspicion which beclouded the view of Mr. Freely's
qualities in the maturer minds of Grimworth through the early months of
his residence there. But when the confectioner ceased to be a novelty, the
suspicions also ceased to be novel, and people got tired of hinting at
them, especially as they seemed to be refuted by his advancing prosperity
and importance. Mr. Freely was becoming a person of influence in the
parish; he was found useful as an overseer of the poor, having great
firmness in enduring other people's pain, which firmness, he said, was
due to his great benevolence; he always did what was good for people in
the end. Mr. Chaloner had even selected him as clergyman's
churchwarden, for he was a very handy man, and much more of Mr.
Chaloner's opinion in everything about church business than the older

 parishioners. Mr. Freely was a very regular churchman, but at the Oyster
Club he was sometimes a little free in his conversation, more than hinting
at a life of Sultanic self-indulgence which he had passed in the West
Indies, shaking his head now and then and smiling rather bitterly, as men
are wont to do when they intimate that they have become a little too wise
to be instructed about a world which has long been flat and stale to them.
For some time he was quite general in his attentions to the fair sex,
combining the gallantries of a lady's man with a severity of criticism on
the person and manners of absent belles, which tended rather to
stimulate in the feminine breast the desire to conquer the approval of so
fastidious a judge. Nothing short of the very best in the department of
female charms and virtues could suffice to kindle the ardour of Mr.
Edward Freely, who had become familiar with the most luxuriant and
dazzling beauty in the West Indies. It may seem incredible that a
confectioner should have ideas and conversation so much resembling
those to be met with in a higher walk of life, but it must be remembered
that he had not merely travelled, he had also bow-legs and a sallow,
small- featured visage, so that nature herself had stamped him for a
fastidious connoisseur of the fair sex.
At last, however, it seemed clear that Cupid had found a sharper arrow
than usual, and that Mr. Freely's heart was pierced. It was the general
talk among the young people at Grimworth. But was it really love, and not
rather ambition? Miss Fullilove, the timber-merchant's daughter, was
quite sure that if she were Miss Penny Palfrey, she would be cautious; it
was not a good sign when men looked so much above themselves for a
wife. For it was no less a person than Miss Penelope Palfrey, second
daughter of the Mr. Palfrey who farmed his own land, that had attracted
Mr. Freely's peculiar regard, and conquered his fastidiousness; and no
wonder, for the Ideal, as exhibited in the finest waxwork, was perhaps
never so closely approached by the Real as in the person of the pretty
Penelope. Her yellowish flaxen hair did not curl naturally, I admit, but its
bright crisp ringlets were such smooth, perfect miniature tubes, that you
would have longed to pass your little finger through them, and feel their
soft elasticity. She wore them in a crop, for in those days, when society
was in a healthier state, young ladies wore crops long after they were
twenty, and Penelope was not yet nineteen. Like the waxen ideal, she had

 round blue eyes, and round nostrils in her little nose, and teeth such as
the ideal would be seen to have, if it ever showed them. Altogether, she
was a small, round thing, as neat as a pink and white double daisy, and
as guileless; for I hope it does not argue guile in a pretty damsel of
nineteen, to think that she should like to have a beau and be "engaged,"
when her elder sister had already been in that position a year and a half.
To be sure, there was young Towers always coming to the house; but
Penny felt convinced he only came to see her brother, for he never had
anything to say to her, and never offered her his arm, and was as
awkward and silent as possible.
It is not unlikely that Mr. Freely had early been smitten by Penny's
charms, as brought under his observation at church, but he had to make
his way in society a little before he could come into nearer contact with
them; and even after he was well received in Grimworth families, it was a
long while before he could converse with Penny otherwise than in an
incidental meeting at Mr. Luff's. It was not so easy to get invited to Long
Meadows, the residence of the Palfreys; for though Mr. Palfrey had been
losing money of late years, not being able quite to recover his feet after
the terrible murrain which forced him to borrow, his family were far from
considering themselves on the same level even as the old-established
tradespeople with whom they visited. The greatest people, even kings and
queens, must visit with somebody, and the equals of the great are scarce.
They were especially scarce at Grimworth, which, as I have before
observed, was a low parish, mentioned with the most scornful brevity in
gazetteers. Even the great people there were far behind those of their
own standing in other parts of this realm. Mr. Palfrey's farmyard doors
had the paint all worn off them, and the front garden walks had long been
merged in a general weediness. Still, his father had been called Squire
Palfrey, and had been respected by the last Grimworth generation as a
man who could afford to drink too much in his own house.
Pretty Penny was not blind to the fact that Mr. Freely admired her, and
she felt sure that it was he who had sent her a beautiful valentine; but
her sister seemed to think so lightly of him (all young ladies think lightly
of the gentlemen to whom they are not engaged), that Penny never dared
mention him, and trembled and blushed whenever they met him, thinking
of the valentine, which was very strong in its expressions, and which she

 felt guilty of knowing by heart. A man who had been to the Indies, and
knew the sea so well, seemed to her a sort of public character, almost like
Robinson Crusoe or Captain Cook; and Penny had always wished her
husband to be a remarkable personage, likely to be put in Mangnall's
Questions, with which register of the immortals she had become
acquainted during her one year at a boarding-school. Only it seemed
strange that a remarkable man should be a confectioner and pastrycook, and this anomaly quite disturbed Penny's dreams. Her brothers, she
knew, laughed at men who couldn't sit on horseback well, and called
them tailors; but her brothers were very rough, and were quite without
that power of anecdote which made Mr. Freely such a delightful
companion. He was a very good man, she thought, for she had heard him
say at Mr. Luff's, one day, that he always wished to do his duty in
whatever state of life he might be placed; and he knew a great deal of
poetry, for one day he had repeated a verse of a song. She wondered if
he had made the words of the valentine!--it ended in this way:--

"Without thee, it is pain to live,
But with thee, it were sweet to die."

Poor Mr. Freely! her father would very likely object--she felt sure he
would, for he always called Mr. Freely "that sugar-plum fellow." Oh, it was
very cruel, when true love was crossed in that way, and all because Mr.
Freely was a confectioner: well, Penny would be true to him, for all that,
and since his being a confectioner gave her an opportunity of showing her
faithfulness, she was glad of it. Edward Freely was a pretty name, much
better than John Towers. Young Towers had offered her a rose out of his
button-hole the other day, blushing very much; but she refused it, and
thought with delight how much Mr. Freely would be comforted if he knew
her firmness of mind.
Poor little Penny! the days were so very long among the daisies on a
grazing farm, and thought is so active--how was it possible that the
inward drama should not get the start of the outward? I have known
young ladies, much better educated, and with an outward world
diversified by instructive lectures, to say nothing of literature and highly-

 developed fancy-work, who have spun a cocoon of visionary joys and
sorrows for themselves, just as Penny did. Her elder sister Letitia, who
had a prouder style of beauty, and a more worldly ambition, was engaged
to a wool-factor, who came all the way from Cattelton to see her; and
everybody knows that a wool-factor takes a very high rank, sometimes
driving a double-bodied gig. Letty's notions got higher every day, and
Penny never dared to speak of her cherished griefs to her lofty sister-never dared to propose that they should call at Mr. Freely's to buy
liquorice, though she had prepared for such an incident by mentioning a
slight sore throat. So she had to pass the shop on the other side of the
market-place, and reflect, with a suppressed sigh, that behind those pink
and white jars somebody was thinking of her tenderly, unconscious of the
small space that divided her from him.
And it was quite true that, when business permitted, Mr. Freely thought a
great deal of Penny. He thought her prettiness comparable to the loveliest
things in confectionery; he judged her to be of submissive temper--likely
to wait upon him as well as if she had been a negress, and to be silently
terrified when his liver made him irritable; and he considered the Palfrey
family quite the best in the parish, possessing marriageable daughters.
On the whole, he thought her worthy to become Mrs. Edward Freely, and
all the more so, because it would probably require some ingenuity to win
her. Mr. Palfrey was capable of horse-whipping a too rash pretender to his
daughter's hand; and, moreover, he had three tall sons: it was clear that
a suitor would be at a disadvantage with such a family, unless travel and
natural acumen had given him a countervailing power of contrivance. And
the first idea that occurred to him in the matter was, that Mr. Palfrey
would object less if he knew that the Freelys were a much higher family
than his own. It had been foolish modesty in him hitherto to conceal the
fact that a branch of the Freelys held a manor in Yorkshire, and to shut up
the portrait of his great uncle the admiral, instead of hanging it up where
a family portrait should be hung--over the mantelpiece in the parlour.
Admiral Freely, K.C.B., once placed in this conspicuous position, was seen
to have had one arm only, and one eye--in these points resembling the
heroic Nelson--while a certain pallid insignificance of feature confirmed
the relationship between himself and his grand-nephew.

 Next, Mr. Freely was seized with an irrepressible ambition to posses Mrs.
Palfrey's receipt for brawn, hers being pronounced on all hands to be
superior to his own--as he informed her in a very flattering letter carried
by his errand-boy. Now Mrs. Palfrey, like other geniuses, wrought by
instinct rather than by rule, and possessed no receipts--indeed, despised
all people who used them, observing that people who pickled by book,
must pickle by weights and measures, and such nonsense; as for herself,
her weights and measures were the tip of her finger and the tip of her
tongue, and if you went nearer, why, of course, for dry goods like flour
and spice, you went by handfuls and pinches, and for wet, there was a
middle-sized jug--quite the best thing whether for much or little, because
you might know how much a teacupful was if you'd got any use of your
senses, and you might be sure it would take five middle-sized jugs to
make a gallon. Knowledge of this kind is like Titian's colouring, difficult to
communicate; and as Mrs. Palfrey, once remarkably handsome, had now
become rather stout and asthmatical, and scarcely ever left home, her
oral teaching could hardly be given anywhere except at Long Meadows.
Even a matron is not insusceptible to flattery, and the prospect of a visitor
whose great object would be to listen to her conversation, was not
without its charms to Mrs. Palfrey. Since there was no receipt to be sent
in reply to Mr. Freely's humble request, she called on her more docile
daughter, Penny, to write a note, telling him that her mother would be
glad to see him and talk with him on brawn, any day that he could call at
Long Meadows. Penny obeyed with a trembling hand, thinking how
wonderfully things came about in this world.
In this way, Mr. Freely got himself introduced into the home of the
Palfreys, and notwithstanding a tendency in the male part of the family to
jeer at him a little as "peaky" and bow-legged, he presently established
his position as an accepted and frequent guest. Young Towers looked at
him with increasing disgust when they met at the house on a Sunday, and
secretly longed to try his ferret upon him, as a piece of vermin which that
valuable animal would be likely to tackle with unhesitating vigour. But--so
blind sometimes are parents--neither Mr. nor Mrs. Palfrey suspected that
Penny would have anything to say to a tradesman of questionable rank
whose youthful bloom was much withered. Young Towers, they thought,
had an eye to her, and that was likely enough to be a match some day;
but Penny was a child at present. And all the while Penny was imagining

 the circumstances under which Mr. Freely would make her an offer:
perhaps down by the row of damson-trees, when they were in the garden
before tea; perhaps by letter--in which case, how would the letter begin?
"Dearest Penelope?" or "My dear Miss Penelope?" or straight off, without
dear anything, as seemed the most natural when people were
embarrassed? But, however he might make the offer, she would not
accept it without her father's consent: she would always be true to Mr.
Freely, but she would not disobey her father. For Penny was a good girl,
though some of her female friends were afterwards of opinion that it
spoke ill for her not to have felt an instinctive repugnance to Mr. Freely.
But he was cautious, and wished to be quite sure of the ground he trod
on. His views on marriage were not entirely sentimental, but were as duly
mingled with considerations of what would be advantageous to a man in
his position, as if he had had a very large amount of money spent on his
education. He was not a man to fall in love in the wrong place; and so, he
applied himself quite as much to conciliate the favour of the parents, as to
secure the attachment of Penny. Mrs. Palfrey had not been inaccessible to
flattery, and her husband, being also of mortal mould, would not, it might
be hoped, be proof against rum--that very fine Jamaica rum--of which Mr.
Freely expected always to have a supply sent him from Jamaica. It was
not easy to get Mr. Palfrey into the parlour behind the shop, where a mild
back-street light fell on the features of the heroic admiral; but by getting
hold of him rather late one evening as he was about to return home from
Grimworth, the aspiring lover succeeded in persuading him to sup on
some collared beef which, after Mrs. Palfrey's brawn, he would find the
very best of cold eating.
From that hour Mr. Freely felt sure of success: being in privacy with an
estimable man old enough to be his father, and being rather lonely in the
world, it was natural he should unbosom himself a little on subjects which
he could not speak of in a mixed circle--especially concerning his
expectations from his uncle in Jamaica, who had no children, and loved
his nephew Edward better than any one else in the world, though he had
been so hurt at his leaving Jamaica, that he had threatened to cut him off
with a shilling. However, he had since written to state his full forgiveness,
and though he was an eccentric old gentleman and could not bear to give
away money during his life, Mr. Edward Freely could show Mr. Palfrey the

 letter which declared, plainly enough, who would be the affectionate
uncle's heir. Mr. Palfrey actually saw the letter, and could not help
admiring the spirit of the nephew who declared that such brilliant hopes
as these made no difference to his conduct; he should work at his humble
business and make his modest fortune at it all the same. If the Jamaica
estate was to come to him--well and good. It was nothing very surprising
for one of the Freely family to have an estate left him, considering the
lands that family had possessed in time gone by--nay, still possessed in
the Northumberland branch. Would not Mr. Palfrey take another glass of
rum? and also look at the last year's balance of the accounts? Mr. Freely
was a man who cared to possess personal virtues, and did not pique
himself on his family, though some men would.
We know how easily the great Leviathan may be led, when once there is a
hook in his nose or a bridle in his jaws. Mr. Palfrey was a large man, but,
like Leviathan's, his bulk went against him when once he had taken a
turning. He was not a mercurial man, who easily changed his point of
view. Enough. Before two months were over, he had given his consent to
Mr. Freely's marriage with his daughter Penny, and having hit on a
formula by which he could justify it, fenced off all doubts and objections,
his own included. The formula was this: "I'm not a man to put my head
up an entry before I know where it leads."
Little Penny was very proud and fluttering, but hardly so happy as she
expected to be in an engagement. She wondered if young Towers cared
much about it, for he had not been to the house lately, and her sister and
brothers were rather inclined to sneer than to sympathize. Grimworth
rang with the news. All men extolled Mr. Freely's good fortune; while the
women, with the tender solicitude characteristic of the sex, wished the
marriage might turn out well.
While affairs were at this triumphant juncture, Mr. Freely one morning
observed that a stone-carver who had been breakfasting in the eatingroom had left a newspaper behind. It was the X-shire Gazette, and Xshire being a county not unknown to Mr. Freely, he felt some curiosity to
glance over it, and especially over the advertisements. A slight flush came
over his face as he read. It was produced by the following
announcement:--"If David Faux, son of Jonathan Faux, late of Gilsbrook,

 will apply at the office of Mr. Strutt, attorney, of Rodham, he will hear of
something to his advantage."
"Father's dead!" exclaimed Mr. Freely, involuntarily. "Can he have left me
a legacy?"

CHAPTER III

Perhaps it was a result quite different from your expectations, that Mr.
David Faux should have returned from the West Indies only a few years
after his arrival there, and have set up in his old business, like any plain
man who has never travelled. But these cases do occur in life. Since, as
we know, men change their skies and see new constellations without
changing their souls, it will follow sometimes that they don't change their
business under those novel circumstances.
Certainly, this result was contrary to David's own expectations. He had
looked forward, you are aware, to a brilliant career among "the blacks";
but, either because they had already seen too many white men, or for
some other reason, they did not at once recognize him as a superior order
of human being; besides, there were no princesses among them. Nobody
in Jamaica was anxious to maintain David for the mere pleasure of his
society; and those hidden merits of a man which are so well known to
himself were as little recognized there as they notoriously are in the
effete society of the Old World. So that in the dark hints that David threw
out at the Oyster Club about that life of Sultanic self-indulgence spent by
him in the luxurious Indies, I really think he was doing himself a wrong; I
believe he worked for his bread, and, in fact, took to cooking as, after all,
the only department in which he could offer skilled labour. He had formed
several ingenious plans by which he meant to circumvent people of large
fortune and small faculty; but then he never met with exactly the right
circumstances. David's devices for getting rich without work had
apparently no direct relation with the world outside him, as his
confectionery receipts had. It is possible to pass a great many bad half
pennies and bad half-crowns, but I believe there has no instance been
known of passing a halfpenny or a half-crown as a sovereign. A sharper

 can drive a brisk trade in this world: it is undeniable that there may be a
fine career for him, if he will dare consequences; but David was too timid
to be a sharper, or venture in any way among the mantraps of the law.
He dared rob nobody but his mother. And so he had to fall back on the
genuine value there was in him--to be content to pass as a good
halfpenny, or, to speak more accurately, as a good confectioner. For in
spite of some additional reading and observation, there was nothing else
he could make so much money by; nay, he found in himself even a
capability of extending his skill in this direction, and embracing all forms
of cookery; while, in other branches of human labour, he began to see
that it was not possible for him to shine. Fate was too strong for him; he
had thought to master her inclination and had fled over the seas to that
end; but she caught him, tied an apron round him, and snatching him
from all other devices, made him devise cakes and patties in a kitchen at
Kingstown. He was getting submissive to her, since she paid him with
tolerable gains; but fevers and prickly heat, and other evils incidental to
cooks in ardent climates, made him long for his native land; so he took
ship once more, carrying his six years' savings, and seeing distinctly, this
time, what were Fate's intentions as to his career. If you question me
closely as to whether all the money with which he set up at Grimworth
consisted of pure and simple earnings, I am obliged to confess that he got
a sum or two for charitably abstaining from mentioning some other
people's misdemeanours. Altogether, since no prospects were attached to
his family name, and since a new christening seemed a suitable
commencement of a new life, Mr. David Faux thought it as well to call
himself Mr. Edward Freely.
But lo! now, in opposition to all calculable probability, some benefit
appeared to be attached to the name of David Faux. Should he neglect it,
as beneath the attention of a prosperous tradesman? It might bring him
into contact with his family again, and he felt no yearnings in that
direction: moreover, he had small belief that the "something to his
advantage" could be anything considerable. On the other hand, even a
small gain is pleasant, and the promise of it in this instance was so
surprising, that David felt his curiosity awakened. The scale dipped at last
on the side of writing to the lawyer, and, to be brief, the correspondence
ended in an appointment for a meeting between David and his eldest

 brother at Mr. Strutt's, the vague "something" having been defined as a
legacy from his father of eighty-two pounds, three shillings.
David, you know, had expected to be disinherited; and so he would have
been, if he had not, like some other indifferent sons, come of excellent
parents, whose conscience made them scrupulous where much more
highly- instructed people often feel themselves warranted in following the
bent of their indignation. Good Mrs. Faux could never forget that she had
brought this ill-conditioned son into the world when he was in that
entirely helpless state which excluded the smallest choice on his part;
and, somehow or other, she felt that his going wrong would be his
father's and mother's fault, if they failed in one tittle of their parental
duty. Her notion of parental duty was not of a high and subtle kind, but it
included giving him his due share of the family property; for when a man
had got a little honest money of his own, was he so likely to steal? To cut
the delinquent son off with a shilling, was like delivering him over to his
evil propensities. No; let the sum of twenty guineas which he had stolen
be deducted from his share, and then let the sum of three guineas be put
back from it, seeing that his mother had always considered three of the
twenty guineas as his; and, though he had run away, and was, perhaps,
gone across the sea, let the money be left to him all the same, and be
kept in reserve for his possible return. Mr. Faux agreed to his wife's
views, and made a codicil to his will accordingly, in time to die with a
clear conscience. But for some time his family thought it likely that David
would never reappear; and the eldest son, who had the charge of Jacob
on his hands, often thought it a little hard that David might perhaps be
dead, and yet, for want of certitude on that point, his legacy could not fall
to his legal heir. But in this state of things the opposite certitude--namely,
that David was still alive and in England--seemed to be brought by the
testimony of a neighbour, who, having been on a journey to Cattelton,
was pretty sure he had seen David in a gig, with a stout man driving by
his side. He could "swear it was David," though he could "give no account
why, for he had no marks on him; but no more had a white dog, and that
didn't hinder folks from knowing a white dog." It was this incident which
had led to the advertisement.
The legacy was paid, of course, after a few preliminary disclosures as to
Mr. David's actual position. He begged to send his love to his mother, and

 to say that he hoped to pay her a dutiful visit by and by; but, at present,
his business and near prospect of marriage made it difficult for him to
leave home. His brother replied with much frankness.
"My mother may do as she likes about having you to see her, but, for my
part, I don't want to catch sight of you on the premises again. When folks
have taken a new name, they'd better keep to their new 'quinetance."
David pocketed the insult along with the eighty-two pounds three, and
travelled home again in some triumph at the ease of a transaction which
had enriched him to this extent. He had no intention of offending his
brother by further claims on his fraternal recognition, and relapsed with
full contentment into the character of Mr. Edward Freely, the orphan,
scion of a great but reduced family, with an eccentric uncle in the West
Indies. (I have already hinted that he had some acquaintance with
imaginative literature; and being of a practical turn, he had, you perceive,
applied even this form of knowledge to practical purposes.)
It was little more than a week after the return from his fruitful journey,
that the day of his marriage with Penny having been fixed, it was agreed
that Mrs. Palfrey should overcome her reluctance to move from home,
and that she and her husband should bring their two daughters to inspect
little Penny's future abode and decide on the new arrangements to be
made for the reception of the bride. Mr. Freely meant her to have a house
so pretty and comfortable that she need not envy even a wool-factor's
wife. Of course, the upper room over the shop was to be the best sittingroom; but also the parlour behind the shop was to be made a suitable
bower for the lovely Penny, who would naturally wish to be near her
husband, though Mr. Freely declared his resolution never to allow his wife
to wait in the shop. The decisions about the parlour furniture were left till
last, because the party was to take tea there; and, about five o'clock,
they were all seated there with the best muffins and buttered buns before
them, little Penny blushing and smiling, with her "crop" in the best order,
and a blue frock showing her little white shoulders, while her opinion was
being always asked and never given. She secretly wished to have a
particular sort of chimney ornaments, but she could not have brought
herself to mention it. Seated by the side of her yellow and rather withered
lover, who, though he had not reached his thirtieth year, had already

 crow's-feet about his eyes, she was quite tremulous at the greatness of
her lot in being married to a man who had travelled so much--and before
her sister Letty! The handsome Letitia looked rather proud and
contemptuous, thought her nature brother-in-law an odious person, and
was vexed with her father and mother for letting Penny marry him. Dear
little Penny! She certainly did look like a fresh white-heart cherry going to
be bitten off the stem by that lipless mouth. Would no deliverer come to
make a slip between that cherry and that mouth without a lip?
"Quite a family likeness between the admiral and you, Mr. Freely,"
observed Mrs. Palfrey, who was looking at the family portrait for the first
time. "It's wonderful! and only a grand-uncle. Do you feature the rest of
your family, as you know of?"
"I can't say," said Mr. Freely, with a sigh. "My family have mostly thought
themselves too high to take any notice of me."
At this moment an extraordinary disturbance was heard in the shop, as of
a heavy animal stamping about and making angry noises, and then of a
glass vessel falling in shivers, while the voice of the apprentice was heard
calling "Master" in great alarm.
Mr. Freely rose in anxious astonishment, and hastened into the shop,
followed by the four Palfreys, who made a group at the parlour-door,
transfixed with wonder at seeing a large man in a smock-frock, with a
pitchfork in his hand, rush up to Mr. Freely and hug him, crying out,-"Zavy, Zavy, b'other Zavy!"
It was Jacob, and for some moments David lost all presence of mind. He
felt arrested for having stolen his mother's guineas. He turned cold, and
trembled in his brother's grasp.
"Why, how's this?" said Mr. Palfrey, advancing from the door. "Who is
he?"
Jacob supplied the answer by saying over and over again--

 "I'se Zacob, b'other Zacob. Come 'o zee Zavy"--till hunger prompted him
to relax his grasp, and to seize a large raised pie, which he lifted to his
mouth.
By this time David's power of device had begun to return, but it was a
very hard task for his prudence to master his rage and hatred towards
poor Jacob.
"I don't know who he is; he must be drunk," he said, in a low tone to Mr.
Palfrey. "But he's dangerous with that pitchfork. He'll never let it go."
Then checking himself on the point of betraying too great an intimacy
with Jacob's habits, he added "You watch him, while I run for the
constable." And he hurried out of the shop.
"Why, where do you come from, my man?" said Mr. Palfrey, speaking to
Jacob in a conciliatory tone. Jacob was eating his pie by large mouthfuls,
and looking round at the other good things in the shop, while he
embraced his pitchfork with his left arm, and laid his left hand on some
Bath buns. He was in the rare position of a person who recovers a long
absent friend and finds him richer than ever in the characteristics that
won his heart.
"I's Zacob--b'other Zacob--'t home. I love Zavy--b'other Zavy," he said,
as soon as Mr. Palfrey had drawn his attention. "Zavy come back from z'
Indies--got mother's zinnies. Where's Zavy?" he added, looking round and
then turning to the others with a questioning air, puzzled by David's
disappearance.
"It's very odd," observed Mr. Palfrey to his wife and daughters. "He seems
to say Freely's his brother come back from th' Indies."
"What a pleasant relation for us!" said Letitia, sarcastically. "I think he's a
good deal like Mr. Freely. He's got just the same sort of nose, and his
eyes are the same colour."
Poor Penny was ready to cry.

 But now Mr. Freely re-entered the shop without the constable. During his
walk of a few yards he had had time and calmness enough to widen his
view of consequences, and he saw that to get Jacob taken to the
workhouse or to the lock-up house as an offensive stranger might have
awkward effects if his family took the trouble of inquiring after him. He
must resign himself to more patient measures.
"On second thoughts," he said, beckoning to Mr. Palfrey and whispering to
him while Jacob's back was turned, "he's a poor half-witted fellow.
Perhaps his friends will come after him. I don't mind giving him
something to eat, and letting him lie down for the night. He's got it into
his head that he knows me--they do get these fancies, idiots do. He'll
perhaps go away again in an hour or two, and make no more ado. I'm a
kind-hearted man myself--I shouldn't like to have the poor fellow illused."
"Why, he'll eat a sovereign's worth in no time," said Mr. Palfrey, thinking
Mr. Freely a little too magnificent in his generosity.
"Eh, Zavy, come back?" exclaimed Jacob, giving his dear brother another
hug, which crushed Mr. Freely's features inconveniently against the stale
of the pitchfork.
"Aye, aye," said Mr. Freely, smiling, with every capability of murder in his
mind, except the courage to commit it. He wished the Bath buns might by
chance have arsenic in them.
"Mother's zinnies?" said Jacob, pointing to a glass jar of yellow lozenges
that stood in the window. "Zive 'em me."
David dared not do otherwise than reach down the glass jar and give
Jacob a handful. He received them in his smock-frock, which he held out
for more.
"They'll keep him quiet a bit, at any rate," thought David, and emptied
the jar. Jacob grinned and mowed with delight.

 "You're very good to this stranger, Mr. Freely," said Letitia; and then
spitefully, as David joined the party at the parlour-door, "I think you
could hardly treat him better, if he was really your brother."
"I've always thought it a duty to be good to idiots," said Mr. Freely,
striving after the most moral view of the subject. "We might have been
idiots ourselves--everybody might have been born idiots, instead of
having their right senses."
"I don't know where there'd ha' been victual for us all then," observed
Mrs. Palfrey, regarding the matter in a housewifely light.
"But let us sit down again and finish our tea," said Mr. Freely. "Let us
leave the poor creature to himself."
They walked into the parlour again; but Jacob, not apparently
appreciating the kindness of leaving him to himself, immediately followed
his brother, and seated himself, pitchfork grounded, at the table.
"Well," said Miss Letitia, rising, "I don't know whether you mean to stay,
mother; but I shall go home."
"Oh, me too," said Penny, frightened to death at Jacob, who had begun to
nod and grin at her.
"Well, I think we had better be going, Mr. Palfrey," said the mother, rising
more slowly.
Mr. Freely, whose complexion had become decidedly yellower during the
last half-hour, did not resist this proposition. He hoped they should meet
again "under happier circumstances."
"It's my belief the man is his brother," said Letitia, when they were all on
their way home.
"Nonsense!" said Mr. Palfrey. "Freely's got no brother--he's said so many
and many a time; he's an orphan; he's got nothing but uncles--leastwise,

 one. What's it matter what an idiot says? What call had Freely to tell
lies?"
Letitia tossed her head and was silent.
Mr. Freely, left alone with his affectionate brother Jacob, brooded over the
possibility of luring him out of the town early the next morning, and
getting him conveyed to Gilsbrook without further betrayals. But the thing
was difficult. He saw clearly that if he took Jacob himself, his absence,
conjoined with the disappearance of the stranger, would either cause the
conviction that he was really a relative, or would oblige him to the
dangerous course of inventing a story to account for his disappearance,
and his own absence at the same time. David groaned. There come
occasions when falsehood is felt to be inconvenient. It would, perhaps,
have been a longer-headed device, if he had never told any of those
clever fibs about his uncles, grand and otherwise; for the Palfreys were
simple people, and shared the popular prejudice against lying. Even if he
could get Jacob away this time, what security was there that he would not
come again, having once found the way? O guineas! O lozenges! what
enviable people those were who had never robbed their mothers, and had
never told fibs! David spent a sleepless night, while Jacob was snoring
close by. Was this the upshot of travelling to the Indies, and acquiring
experience combined with anecdote?
He rose at break of day, as he had once before done when he was in fear
of Jacob, and took all gentle means to rouse this fatal brother from his
deep sleep; he dared not be loud, because his apprentice was in the
house, and would report everything. But Jacob was not to be roused. He
fought out with his fist at the unknown cause of disturbance, turned over,
and snored again. He must be left to wake as he would. David, with a cold
perspiration on his brow, confessed to himself that Jacob could not be got
away that day.
Mr. Palfrey came over to Grimworth before noon, with a natural curiosity
to see how his future son-in-law got on with the stranger to whom he was
so benevolently inclined. He found a crowd round the shop. All Grimworth
by this time had heard how Freely had been fastened on by an idiot, who
called him "Brother Zavy"; and the younger population seemed to find the

 singular stranger an unwearying source of fascination, while the
householders dropped in one by one to inquire into the incident.
"Why don't you send him to the workhouse?" said Mr. Prettyman. "You'll
have a row with him and the children presently, and he'll eat you up. The
workhouse is the proper place for him; let his kin claim him, if he's got
any."
"Those may be your feelings, Mr. Prettyman," said David, his mind quite
enfeebled by the torture of his position.
"What! is he your brother, then?" said Mr. Prettyman, looking at his
neighbour Freely rather sharply.
"All men are our brothers, and idiots particular so," said Mr. Freely, who,
like many other travelled men, was not master of the English language.
"Come, come, if he's your brother, tell the truth, man," said Mr.
Prettyman, with growing suspicion. "Don't be ashamed of your own flesh
and blood."
Mr. Palfrey was present, and also had his eye on Freely. It is difficult for a
man to believe in the advantage of a truth which will disclose him to have
been a liar. In this critical moment, David shrank from this immediate
disgrace in the eyes of his future father-in-law.
"Mr. Prettyman," he said, "I take your observations as an insult. I've no
reason to be otherwise than proud of my own flesh and blood. If this poor
man was my brother more than all men are, I should say so."
A tall figure darkened the door, and David, lifting his eyes in that
direction, saw his eldest brother, Jonathan, on the door-sill.
"I'll stay wi' Zavy," shouted Jacob, as he, too, caught sight of his eldest
brother; and, running behind the counter, he clutched David hard.
"What, he is here?" said Jonathan Faux, coming forward. "My mother
would have no nay, as he'd been away so long, but I must see after him.

 And it struck me he was very like come after you, because we'd been
talking of you o' late, and where you lived."
David saw there was no escape; he smiled a ghastly smile.
"What! is this a relation of yours, sir?" said Mr. Palfrey to Jonathan.
"Aye, it's my innicent of a brother, sure enough," said honest Jonathan.
"A fine trouble and cost he is to us, in th' eating and other things, but we
must bear what's laid on us."
"And your name's Freely, is it?" said Mr. Prettyman.
"Nay, nay, my name's Faux, I know nothing o' Freelys," said Jonathan,
curtly. "Come," he added, turning to David, "I must take some news to
mother about Jacob. Shall I take him with me, or will you undertake to
send him back?"
"Take him, if you can make him loose his hold of me," said David, feebly.
"Is this gentleman here in the confectionery line your brother, then, sir?"
said Mr. Prettyman, feeling that it was an occasion on which format
language must be used.
"I don't want to own him," said Jonathan, unable to resist a movement of
indignation that had never been allowed to satisfy itself. "He ran away
from home with good reasons in his pocket years ago: he didn't want to
be owned again, I reckon."
Mr. Palfrey left the shop; he felt his own pride too severely wounded by
the sense that he had let himself be fooled, to feel curiosity for further
details. The most pressing business was to go home and tell his daughter
that Freely was a poor sneak, probably a rascal, and that her engagement
was broken off.
Mr. Prettyman stayed, with some internal self-gratulation that he had
never given in to Freely, and that Mr. Chaloner would see now what sort
of fellow it was that he had put over the heads of older parishioners. He

 considered it due from him (Mr. Prettyman) that, for the interests of the
parish, he should know all that was to be known about this "interloper."
Grimworth would have people coming from Botany Bay to settle in it, if
things went on in this way.
It soon appeared that Jacob could not be made to quit his dear brother
David except by force. He understood, with a clearness equal to that of
the most intelligent mind, that Jonathan would take him back to skimmed
milk, apple-dumpling, broad beans, and pork. And he had found a
paradise in his brother's shop. It was a difficult matter to use force with
Jacob, for he wore heavy nailed boots; and if his pitchfork had been
mastered, he would have resorted without hesitation to kicks. Nothing
short of using guile to bind him hand and foot would have made all
parties safe.
"Let him stay," said David, with desperate resignation, frightened above
all things at the idea of further disturbances in his shop, which would
make his exposure all the more conspicuous. "You go away again, and tomorrow I can, perhaps, get him to go to Gilsbrook with me. He'll follow
me fast enough, I daresay," he added, with a half-groan.
"Very well," said Jonathan, gruffly. "I don't see why you shouldn't have
some trouble and expense with him as well as the rest of us. But mind
you bring him back safe and soon, else mother'll never rest."
On this arrangement being concluded, Mr. Prettyman begged Mr.
Jonathan Faux to go and take a snack with him, an invitation which was
quite acceptable; and as honest Jonathan had nothing to be ashamed of,
it is probable that he was very frank in his communications to the civil
draper, who, pursuing the benefit of the parish, hastened to make all the
information he could gather about Freely common parochial property. You
may imagine that the meeting of the Club at the Woolpack that evening
was unusually lively. Every member was anxious to prove that he had
never liked Freely, as he called himself. Faux was his name, was it? Fox
would have been more suitable. The majority expressed a desire to see
him hooted out of the town.

 Mr. Freely did not venture over his door-sill that day, for he knew Jacob
would keep at his side, and there was every probability that they would
have a train of juvenile followers. He sent to engage the Woolpack gig for
an early hour the next morning; but this order was not kept religiously a
secret by the landlord. Mr. Freely was informed that he could not have the
gig till seven; and the Grimworth people were early risers. Perhaps they
were more alert than usual on this particular morning; for when Jacob,
with a bag of sweets in his hand, was induced to mount the gig with his
brother David, the inhabitants of the market-place were looking out of
their doors and windows, and at the turning of the street there was even
a muster of apprentices and schoolboys, who shouted as they passed in
what Jacob took to be a very merry and friendly way, nodding and
grinning in return. "Huzzay, David Faux! how's your uncle?" was their
morning's greeting. Like other pointed things, it was not altogether
impromptu.
Even this public derision was not so crushing to David as the horrible
thought that though he might succeed now in getting Jacob home again
there would never be any security against his coming back, like a wasp to
the honey-pot. As long as David lived at Grimworth, Jacob's return would
be hanging over him. But could he go on living at Grimworth--an object of
ridicule, discarded by the Palfreys, after having revelled in the
consciousness that he was an envied and prosperous confectioner? David
liked to be envied; he minded less about being loved.
His doubts on this point were soon settled. The mind of Grimworth
became obstinately set against him and his viands, and the new school
being finished, the eating-room was closed. If there had been no other
reason, sympathy with the Palfreys, that respectable family who had lived
in the parish time out of mind, would have determined all well-to-do
people to decline Freely's goods. Besides, he had absconded with his
mother's guineas: who knew what else he had done, in Jamaica or
elsewhere, before he came to Grimworth, worming himself into families
under false pretences? Females shuddered. Dreadful suspicions gathered
round him: his green eyes, his bow-legs had a criminal aspect. The rector
disliked the sight of a man who had imposed upon him; and all boys who
could not afford to purchase, hooted "David Faux" as they passed his
shop. Certainly no man now would pay anything for the "goodwill" of Mr.

 Freely's business, and he would be obliged to quit it without a peculium so
desirable towards defraying the expense of moving.
In a few months the shop in the market-place was again to let, and Mr.
David Faux, alias Mr. Edward Freely, had gone--nobody at Grimworth
knew whither. In this way the demoralization of Grimworth women was
checked. Young Mrs. Steene renewed her efforts to make light mincepies, and having at last made a batch so excellent that Mr. Steene looked
at her with complacency as he ate them, and said they were the best he
had ever eaten in his life, she thought less of bulbuls and renegades ever
after. The secrets of the finer cookery were revived in the breasts of
matronly house-wives, and daughters were again anxious to be initiated
in them.
You will further, I hope, be glad to bear, that some purchases of drapery
made by pretty Penny, in preparation for her marriage with Mr. Freely,
came in quite as well for her wedding with young Towers as if they had
been made expressly for the latter occasion. For Penny's complexion had
not altered, and blue always became it best.
Here ends the story of Mr. David Faux, confectioner, and his brother
Jacob. And we see in it, I think, an admirable instance of the unexpected
forms in which the great Nemesis hides herself.

 
The Dream of a Ridiculous Man
by Fyodor Dostoevsky
(translated Constance Garnett)
I
I am a ridiculous person. Now they call me a madman. That would be a
promotion if it were not that I remain as ridiculous in their eyes as before.
But now I do not resent it, they are all dear to me now, even when they
laugh at me - and, indeed, it is just then that they are particularly dear to
me. I could join in their laughter - not exactly at myself, but through
affection for them, if I did not feel so sad as I look at them. Sad because
they do not know the truth and I do know it. Oh, how hard it is to be the
only one who knows the truth! But they won't understand that. No, they
won't understand it.
In old days I used to be miserable at seeming ridiculous. Not seeming,
but being. I have always been ridiculous, and I have known it, perhaps,
from the hour I was born. Perhaps from the time I was seven years old I
knew I was ridiculous. Afterwards I went to school, studied at the
university, and, do you know, the more I learned, the more thoroughly I
understood that I was ridiculous. So that it seemed in the end as though
all the sciences I studied at the university existed only to prove and make
evident to me as I went more deeply into them that I was ridiculous. It
was the same with life as it was with science. With every year the same
consciousness of the ridiculous figure I cut in every relation grew and
strengthened. Everyone always laughed at me. But not one of them knew
or guessed that if there were one man on earth who knew better than
anybody else that I was absurd, it was myself, and what I resented most
of all was that they did not know that. But that was my own fault; I was
so proud that nothing would have ever induced me to tell it to anyone.
This pride grew in me with the years; and if it had happened that I
allowed myself to confess to anyone that I was ridiculous, I believe that I

 should have blown out my brains the same evening. Oh, how I suffered in
my early youth from the fear that I might give way and confess it to my
schoolfellows. But since I grew to manhood, I have for some unknown
reason become calmer, though I realised my awful characteristic more
fully every year. I say unknown, for to this day I cannot tell why it was.
Perhaps it was owing to the terrible misery that was growing in my soul
through something which was of more consequence than anything else
about me: that something was the conviction that had come upon me
that nothing in the world mattered. I had long had an inkling of it, but the
full realisation came last year almost suddenly. I suddenly felt that it was
all the same to me whether the world existed or whether there had never
been anything at all: I began to feel with all my being that there was
nothing existing. At first I fancied that many things had existed in the
past, but afterwards I guessed that there never had been anything in the
past either, but that it had only seemed so for some reason. Little by little
I guessed that there would be nothing in the future either. Then I left off
being angry with people and almost ceased to notice them. Indeed this
showed itself even in the pettiest trifles: I used, for instance, to knock
against people in the street. And not so much from being lost in thought:
what had I to think about? I had almost given up thinking by that time;
nothing mattered to me. If at least I had solved my problems! Oh, I had
not settled one of them, and how many there were! But I gave up caring
about anything, and all the problems disappeared.
And it was after that that I found out the truth. I learnt the truth last
November - on the third of November, to be precise - and I remember
every instant since. It was a gloomy evening, one of the gloomiest
possible evenings. I was going home at about eleven o'clock, and I
remember that I thought that the evening could not be gloomier. Even
physically. Rain had been falling all day, and it had been a cold, gloomy,
almost menacing rain, with, I remember, an unmistakable spite against
mankind. Suddenly between ten and eleven it had stopped, and was
followed by a horrible dampness, colder and damper than the rain, and a
sort of steam was rising from everything, from every stone in the street,

 and from every by-lane if one looked down it as far as one could. A
thought suddenly occurred to me, that if all the street lamps had been put
out it would have been less cheerless, that the gas made one's heart
sadder because it lighted it all up. I had had scarcely any dinner that day,
and had been spending the evening with an engineer, and two other
friends had been there also. I sat silent - I fancy I bored them. They
talked of something rousing and suddenly they got excited over it. But
they did not really care, I could see that, and only made a show of being
excited. I suddenly said as much to them. "My friends," I said, "you really
do not care one way or the other." They were not offended, but they
laughed at me. That was because I spoke without any not of reproach,
simply because it did not matter to me. They saw it did not, and it
amused them.
As I was thinking about the gas lamps in the street I looked up at the sky.
The sky was horribly dark, but one could distinctly see tattered clouds,
and between them fathomless black patches. Suddenly I noticed in one of
these patches a star, and began watching it intently. That was because
that star had given me an idea: I decided to kill myself that night. I had
firmly determined to do so two months before, and poor as I was, I
bought a splendid revolver that very day, and loaded it. But two months
had passed and it was still lying in my drawer; I was so utterly indifferent
that I wanted to seize a moment when I would not be so indifferent why, I don't know. And so for two months every night that I came home I
thought I would shoot myself. I kept waiting for the right moment. And so
now this star gave me a thought. I made up my mind that it should
certainly be that night. And why the star gave me the thought I don't
know.
And just as I was looking at the sky, this little girl took me by the elbow.
The street was empty, and there was scarcely anyone to be seen. A
cabman was sleeping in the distance in his cab. It was a child of eight
with a kerchief on her head, wearing nothing but a wretched little dress
all soaked with rain, but I noticed her wet broken shoes and I recall them

 now. They caught my eye particularly. She suddenly pulled me by the
elbow and called me. She was not weeping, but was spasmodically crying
out some words which could not utter properly, because she was
shivering and shuddering all over. She was in terror about something, and
kept crying, "Mammy, mammy!" I turned facing her, I did not say a word
and went on; but she ran, pulling at me, and there was that note in her
voice which in frightened children means despair. I know that sound.
Though she did not articulate the words, I understood that her mother
was dying, or that something of the sort was happening to them, and that
she had run out to call someone, to find something to help her mother. I
did not go with her; on the contrary, I had an impulse to drive her away.
I told her first to go to a policeman. But clasping her hands, she ran
beside me sobbing and gasping, and would not leave me. Then I stamped
my foot and shouted at her. She called out "Sir! sir! . . ." but suddenly
abandoned me and rushed headlong across the road. Some other
passerby appeared there, and she evidently flew from me to him.
I mounted up to my fifth storey. I have a room in a flat where there are
other lodgers. Mr room is small and poor, with a garret window in the
shape of a semicircle. I have a sofa covered with American leather, a
table with books on it, two chairs and a comfortable arm-chair, as old as
old can be, but of the good old-fashioned shape. I sat down, lighted the
candle, and began thinking. In the room next to mine, through the
partition wall, a perfect Bedlam was going on. It had been going on for
the last three days. A retired captain lived there, and he had half a dozen
visitors, gentlemen of doubtful reputation, drinking vodka and playing
stoss with old cards. The night before there had been a fight, and I know
that two of them had been for a long time engaged in dragging each
other about by the hair. The landlady wanted to complain, but she was in
abject terror of the captain. There was only one other lodger in the flat, a
thin little regimental lady, on a visit to Petersburg, with three little
children who had been taken ill since they came into the lodgings. Both
she and her children were in mortal fear of the captain, and lay trembling
and crossing themselves all night, and the youngest child had a sort of fit

 from fright. That captain, I know for a fact, sometimes stops people in the
Nevsky Prospect and begs. They won't take him into the service, but
strange to say (that's why I am telling this), all this month that the
captain has been here his behaviour has caused me no annoyance. I
have, of course, tried to avoid his acquaintance from the very beginning,
and he, too, was bored with me from the first; but I never care how much
they shout the other side of the partition nor how many of them there are
in there: I sit up all night and forget them so completely that I do not
even hear them. I stay awake till daybreak, and have been going on like
that for the last year. I sit up all night in my arm-chair at the table, doing
nothing. I only read by day. I sit - don't even think; ideas of a sort
wander through my mind and I let them come and go as they will. A
whole candle is burnt every night. I sat down quietly at the table, took
out the revolver and put it down before me. When I had put it down I
asked myself, I remember, "Is that so?" and answered with complete
conviction, "It is." That is, I shall shoot myself. I knew that I should shoot
myself that night for certain, but how much longer I should go on sitting
at the table I did not know. And no doubt I should have shot myself if it
had not been for that little girl.
II
You see, though nothing mattered to me, I could feel pain, for instance. If
anyone had stuck me it would have hurt me. It was the same morally: if
anything very pathetic happened, I should have felt pity just as I used to
do in old days when there were things in life that did matter to me. I had
felt pity that evening. I should have certainly helped a child. Why, then,
had I not helped the little girl? Because of an idea that occurred to me at
the time: when she was calling and pulling at me, a question suddenly
arose before me and I could not settle it. The question was an idle one,
but I was vexed. I was vexed at the reflection that if I were going to
make an end of myself that night, nothing in life ought to have mattered
to me. Why was it that all at once I did not feel a strange pang, quite
incongruous in my position. Really I do not know better how to convey

 my fleeting sensation at the moment, but the sensation persisted at home
when I was sitting at the table, and I was very much irritated as I had not
been for a long time past. One reflection followed another. I saw clearly
that so long as I was still a human being and not nothingness, I was alive
and so could suffer, be angry and feel shame at my actions. So be it. But
if I am going to kill myself, in two hours, say, what is the little girl to me
and what have I to do with shame or with anything else in the world? I
shall turn into nothing, absolutely nothing. And can it really be true that
the consciousness that I shall completely cease to exist immediately and
so everything else will cease to exist, does not in the least affect my
feeling of pity for the child nor the feeling of shame after a contemptible
action? I stamped and shouted at the unhappy child as though to say not only I feel no pity, but even if I behave inhumanly and contemptibly, I
am free to, for in another two hours everything will be extinguished. Do
you believe that that was why I shouted that? I am almost convinced of it
now. I seemed clear to me that life and the world somehow depended
upon me now. I may almost say that the world now seemed created for
me alone: if I shot myself the world would cease to be at least for me. I
say nothing of its being likely that nothing will exist for anyone when I am
gone, and that as soon as my consciousness is extinguished the whole
world will vanish too and become void like a phantom, as a mere
appurtenance of my consciousness, for possibly all this world and all
these people are only me myself. I remember that as I sat and reflected,
I turned all these new questions that swarmed one after another quite the
other way, and thought of something quite new. For instance, a strange
reflection suddenly occurred to me, that if I had lived before on the moon
or on Mars and there had committed the most disgraceful and
dishonourable action and had there been put to such shame and ignominy
as one can only conceive and realise in dreams, in nightmares, and if,
finding myself afterwards on earth, I were able to retain the memory of
what I had done on the other planet and at the same time knew that I
should never, under any circumstances, return there, then looking from
the earth to the moon - should I care or not? Should I feel shame for that

 action or not? These were idle and superfluous questions for the revolver
was already lying before me, and I knew in every fibre of my being that it
would happen for certain, but they excited me and I raged. I could not die
now without having first settled something. In short, the child had saved
me, for I put off my pistol shot for the sake of these questions. Meanwhile
the clamour had begun to subside in the captain's room: they had
finished their game, were settling down to sleep, and meanwhile were
grumbling and languidly winding up their quarrels. At that point, I
suddenly fell asleep in my chair at the table - a thing which had never
happened to me before. I dropped asleep quite unawares.
Dreams, as we all know, are very queer things: some parts are presented
with appalling vividness, with details worked up with the elaborate finish
of jewellery, while others one gallops through, as it were, without noticing
them at all, as, for instance, through space and time. Dreams seem to be
spurred on not by reason but by desire, not by the head but by the heart,
and yet what complicated tricks my reason has played sometimes in
dreams, what utterly incomprehensible things happen to it! Mr brother
died five years ago, for instance. I sometimes dream of him; he takes
part in my affairs, we are very much interested, and yet all through my
dream I quite know and remember that my brother is dead and buried.
How is it that I am not surprised that, though he is dead, he is here
beside me and working with me? Why is it that my reason fully accepts it?
But enough. I will begin about my dream. Yes, I dreamed a dream, my
dream of the third of November. They tease me now, telling me it was
only a dream. But does it matter whether it was a dream or reality, if the
dream made known to me the truth? If once one has recognized the truth
and seen it, you know that it is the truth and that there is no other and
there cannot be, whether you are asleep or awake. Let it be a dream, so
be it, but that real life of which you make so much I had meant to
extinguish by suicide, and my dream, my dream - oh, it revealed to me a
different life, renewed, grand and full of power!
Listen.

 III
I have mentioned that I dropped asleep unawares and even seemed to be
still reflecting on the same subjects. I suddenly dreamt that I picked up
the revolver and aimed it straight at my heart - my heart, and not my
head; and I had determined beforehand to fire at my head, at my right
temple. After aiming at my chest I waited a second or two, and suddenly
my candle, my table, and the wall in front of me began moving and
heaving. I made haste to pull the trigger.
In dreams you sometimes fall from a height, or are stabbed, or beaten,
but you never feel pain unless, perhaps, you really bruise yourself against
the bedstead, then you feel pain and almost always wake up from it. It
was the same in my dream. I did not feel any pain, but it seemed as
though with my shot everything within me was shaken and everything 
was suddenly dimmed, and it grew horribly black around me. I seemed to
be blinded, and it benumbed, and I was lying on something hard,
stretched on my back; I saw nothing, and could not make the slightest
movement. People were walking and shouting around me, the captain
bawled, the landlady shrieked - and suddenly another break and I was
being carried in a closed coffin. And I felt how the coffin was shaking and
reflected upon it, and for the first time the idea struck me that I was
dead, utterly dead, I knew it and had no doubt of it, I could neither see
nor move and yet I was feeling and reflecting. But I was soon reconciled
to the position, and as one usually does in a dream, accepted the facts
without disputing them.
And now I was buried in the earth. They all went away, I was left alone,
utterly alone. I did not move. Whenever before I had imagined being
buried the one sensation I associated with the grave was that of damp
and cold. So now I felt that I was very cold, especially the tips of my toes,
but I felt nothing else.
I lay still, strange to say I expected nothing, accepting without dispute
that a dead man had nothing to expect. But it was damp. I don't know

 how long a time passed - whether an hour or several days, or many days.
But all at once a drop of water fell on my closed left eye, making its way
through the coffin lid; it was followed a minute later by a second, then a
minute later by a third - and so on, regularly every minute. There was a
sudden glow of profound indignation in my heart, and I suddenly felt in it
a pang of physical pain. "That's my wound," I thought; "that's the bullet .
. ." And drop after drop every minute kept falling on my closed eyelid.
And all at once, not with my voice, but with my entire being, I called upon
the power that was responsible for all that was happening to me:
"Whoever you may be, if you exist, and if anything more rational that
what is happening here is possible, suffer it to be here now. But if you are
revenging yourself upon me for my senseless suicide by the hideousness
and absurdity of this subsequent existence, then let me tell you that no
torture could ever equal the contempt which I shall go on dumbly feeling,
though my martyrdom may last a million years!"
I made this appeal and held my peace. There was a full minute of
unbroken silence and again another drop fell, but I knew with infinite
unshakable certainty that everything would change immediately. And
behold my grave suddenly was rent asunder, that is, I don't know
whether it was opened or dug up, but I was caught up by some dark and
unknown being and we found ourselves in space. I suddenly regained my
sight. It was the dead of night, and never, never had there been such
darkness. We were flying through space far away from the earth. I did not
question the being who was taking me; I was proud and waited. I assured
myself that I was not afraid, and was thrilled with ecstasy at the thought
that I was not afraid. I do not know how long we were flying, I cannot
imagine; it happened as it always does in dreams when you skip over
space and time, and the laws of thought and existence, and only pause
upon the points for which the heart yearns. I remember that I suddenly
saw in the darkness a star. "Is that Sirius?" I asked impulsively, though I
had not meant to ask questions.

 "No, that is the star you saw between the clouds when you were coming
home," the being who was carrying me replied.
I knew that it had something like a human face. Strange to say, I did not
like that being, in fact I felt an intense aversion for it. I had expected
complete non-existence, and that was why I had put a bullet through my
heart. And here I was in the hands of a creature not human, of course,
but yet living, existing. "And so there is life beyond the grave," I thought
with the strange frivolity one has in dreams. But in its inmost depth my
heart remained unchanged. "And if I have got to exist again," I thought,
"and live once more under the control of some irresistible power, I won't
be vanquished and humiliated."
"You know that I am afraid of you and despise me for that," I said
suddenly to my companion, unable to refrain from the humiliating
question which implied a confession, and feeling my humiliation stab my
heart as with a pin. He did not answer my question, but all at once I felt
that he was not even despising me, but was laughing at me and had no
compassion for me, and that our journey had an unknown and mysterious
object that concerned me only. Fear was growing in my heart. Something
was mutely and painfully communicated to me from my silent companion,
and permeated my whole being. We were flying through dark, unknown
space. I had for some time lost sight of the constellations familiar to my
eyes. I knew that there were stars in the heavenly spaces the light of
which took thousands or millions of years to reach the earth. Perhaps we
were already flying through those spaces. I expected something with a
terrible anguish that tortured my heart. And suddenly I was thrilled by a
familiar feeling that stirred me to the depths: I suddenly caught sight of
our sun! I knew that it could not be our sun, that gave life to our earth,
and that we were an infinite distance from our sun, but for some reason I
knew in my whole being that it was a sun exactly like ours, a duplicate of
it. A sweet, thrilling feeling resounded with ecstasy in my heart: the
kindred power of the same light which had given me light stirred an echo

 in my heart and awakened it, and I had a sensation of life, the old life of
the past for the first time since I had been in the grave.
"But if that is the sun, if that is exactly the same as our sun," I cried,
"where is the earth?"
And my companion pointed to a star twinkling in the distance with an
emerald light. We were flying straight towards it.
"And are such repetitions possible in the universe? Can that be the law of
Nature? . . . And if that is an earth there, can it be just the same earth as
ours . . . just the same, as poor, as unhappy, but precious and beloved
for ever, arousing in the most ungrateful of her children the same 
poignant love for her that we feel for our earth?" I cried out, shaken by
irresistible, ecstatic love for the old familiar earth which I had left. The
image of the poor child whom I had repulsed flashed through my mind.
"You shall see it all," answered my companion, and there was a note of
sorrow in his voice.
But we were rapidly approaching the planet. It was growing before my
eyes; I could already distinguish the ocean, the outline of Europe; and
suddenly a feeling of a great and holy jealousy glowed in my heart.
"How can it be repeated and what for? I love and can love only that earth
which I have left, stained with my blood, when, in my ingratitude, I
quenched my life with a bullet in my heart. But I have never, never
ceased to love that earth, and perhaps on the very night I parted from it I
loved it more than ever. Is there suffering upon this new earth? On our
earth we can only love with suffering and through suffering. We cannot
love otherwise, and we know of no other sort of love. I want suffering in
order to love. I long, I thirst, this very instant, to kiss with tears the earth
that I have left, and I don't want, I won't accept life on any other!"
But my companion had already left me. I suddenly, quite without noticing
how, found myself on this other earth, in the bright light of a sunny day,

 fair as paradise. I believe I was standing on one of the islands that make
up on our globe the Greek archipelago, or on the coast of the mainland
facing that archipelago. Oh, everything was exactly as it is with us, only
everything seemed to have a festive radiance, the splendour of some
great, holy triumph attained at last. The caressing sea, green as emerald,
splashed softly upon the shore and kissed it with manifest, almost
conscious love. The tall, lovely trees stood in all the glory of their
blossom, and their innumerable leaves greeted me, I am certain, with
their soft, caressing rustle and seemed to articulate words of love. The
grass glowed with bright and fragrant flowers. Birds were flying in flocks
in the air, and perched fearlessly on my shoulders and arms and joyfully
struck me with their darling, fluttering wings. And at last I saw and knew
the people of this happy land. That came to me of themselves, they
surrounded me, kissed me. The children of the sun, the children of their
sun - oh, how beautiful they were! Never had I seen on our own earth
such beauty in mankind. Only perhaps in our children, in their earliest
years, one might find, some remote faint reflection of this beauty. The
eyes of these happy people shone with a clear brightness. Their faces
were radiant with the light of reason and fullness of a serenity that comes
of perfect understanding, but those faces were gay; in their words and
voices there was a note of childlike joy. Oh, from the first moment, from
the first glance at them, I understood it all! It was the earth untarnished
by the Fall; on it lived people who had not sinned. They lived just in such
a paradise as that in which, according to all the legends of mankind, our
first parents lived before they sinned; the only difference was that all this
earth was the same paradise. These people, laughing joyfully, thronged
round me and caressed me; they took me home with them, and each of
them tried to reassure me. Oh, they asked me no questions, but they
seemed, I fancied, to know everything without asking, and they wanted
to make haste to smoothe away the signs of suffering from my face.
IV

 And do you know what? Well, granted that it was only a dream, yet the
sensation of the love of those innocent and beautiful people has remained
with me for ever, and I feel as though their love is still flowing out to me
from over there. I have seen them myself, have known them and been
convinced; I loved them, I suffered for them afterwards. Oh, I understood
at once even at the time that in many things I could not understand them
at all; as an up-to-date Russian progressive and contemptible
Petersburger, it struck me as inexplicable that, knowing so much, they
had, for instance, no science like our. But I soon realised that their
knowledge was gained and fostered by intuitions different from those of
us on earth, and that their aspirations, too, were quite different. They
desired nothing and were at peace; they did not aspire to knowledge of
life as we aspire to understand it, because their lives were full. But their
knowledge was higher and deeper than ours; for our science seeks to
explain what life is, aspires to understand it in order to teach others how
to love, while they without science knew how to live; and that I
understood, but I could not understand their knowledge. They showed me
their trees, and I could not understand the intense love with which they
looked at them; it was as though they were talking with creatures like
themselves. And perhaps I shall not be mistaken if I say that they
conversed with them. Yes, they had found their language, and I am
convinced that the trees understood them. They looked at all Nature like
that - at the animals who lived in peace with them and did not attack
them, but loved them, conquered by their love. They pointed to the stars
and told me something about them which I could not understand, but I
am convinced that they were somehow in touch with the stars, not only in
thought, but by some living channel. Oh, these people did not persist in
trying to make me understand them, they loved me without that, but I
knew that they would never understand me, and so I hardly spoke to
them about our earth. I only kissed in their presence the earth on which
they lived and mutely worshipped them themselves. And they saw that
and let me worship them without being abashed at my adoration, for they
themselves loved much. They were not unhappy on my account when at

 times I kissed their feet with tears, joyfully conscious of the love with
which they would respond to mine. At times I asked myself with wonder
how it was they were able never to offend a creature like me, and never
once to arouse a feeling of jealousy or envy in me? Often I wondered how
it could be that, boastful and untruthful as I was, I never talked to them
of what I knew - of which, of course, they had no notion - that I was
never tempted to do so by a desire to astonish or even to benefit them.
They were as gay and sportive as children. They wandered about their
lovely woods and copses, they sang their lovely songs; their fair was light
- the fruits of their trees, the honey from their woods, and the milk of the
animals who loved them. The work they did for food and raiment was
brief and not labourious. They loved and begot children, but I never
noticed in them the impulse of that cruel sensuality which overcomes
almost every man on this earth, all and each, and is the source of almost
every sin of mankind on earth. They rejoiced at the arrival of children as
new beings to share their happiness. There was no quarrelling, no
jealousy among them, and they did not even know what the words
meant. Their children were the children of all, for they all made up one
family. There was scarcely any illness among them, though there was
death; but their old people died peacefully, as though falling asleep,
giving blessings and smiles to those who surrounded them to take their
last farewell with bright and lovely smiles. I never saw grief or tears on
those occasions, but only love, which reached the point of ecstasy, but a
calm ecstasy, made perfect and contemplative. One might think that they
were still in contact with the departed after death, and that their earthly
union was not cut short by death. They scarcely understood me when I
questioned them about immortality, but evidently they were so convinced
of it without reasoning that it was not for them a question at all. They had
no temples, but they had a real living and uninterrupted sense of oneness
with the whole of the universe; they had no creed, but they had a certain
knowledge that when their earthly joy had reached the limits of earthly
nature, then there would come for them, for the living and for the dead, a
still greater fullness of contact with the whole of the universe. They

 looked forward to that moment with joy, but without haste, not pining for
it, but seeming to have a foretaste of it in their hearts, of which they
talked to one another.
In the evening before going to sleep they liked singing in musical and
harmonious chorus. In those songs they expressed all the sensations that
the parting day had given them, sang its glories and took leave of it. They
sang the praises of nature, of the sea, of the woods. They liked making
songs about one another, and praised each other like children; they were
the simplest songs, but they sprang from their hearts and went to one's
heart. And not only in their songs but in all their lives they seemed to do
nothing but admire one another. It was like being in love with each other,
but an all-embracing, universal feeling.
Some of their songs, solemn and rapturous, I scarcely understood at all.
Though I understood the words I could never fathom their full
significance. It remained, as it were, beyond the grasp of my mind, yet
my heart unconsciously absorbed it more and more. I often told them
that I had had a presentiment of it long before, that this joy and glory
had come to me on our earth in the form of a yearning melancholy that at
times approached insufferable sorrow; that I had had a foreknowledge of
them all and of their glory in the dreams of my heart and the visions of
my mind; that often on our earth I could not look at the setting sun
without tears. . . that in my hatred for the men of our earth there was
always a yearning anguish: why could I not hate them without loving
them? why could I not help forgiving them? and in my love for them there
was a yearning grief: why could I not love them without hating them?
They listened to me, and I saw they could not conceive what I was
saying, but I did not regret that I had spoken to them of it: I knew that
they understood the intensity of my yearning anguish over those whom I
had left. But when they looked at me with their sweet eyes full of love,
when I felt that in their presence my heart, too, became as innocent and
just as theirs, the feeling of the fullness of life took my breath away, and I
worshipped them in silence.

 Oh, everyone laughs in my face now, and assures me that one cannot
dream of such details as I am telling now, that I only dreamed or felt one
sensation that arose in my heart in delirium and made up the details
myself when I woke up. And when I told them that perhaps it really was
so, my God, how they shouted with laughter in my face, and what mirth I
caused! Oh, yes, of course I was overcome by the mere sensation of my
dream, and that was all that was preserved in my cruelly wounded heart;
but the actual forms and images of my dream, that is, the very ones I
really saw at the very time of my dream, were filled with such harmony,
were so lovely and enchanting and were so actual, that on awakening I
was, of course, incapable of clothing them in our poor language, so that
they were bound to become blurred in my mind; and so perhaps I really
was forced afterwards to make up the details, and so of course to distort
them in my passionate desire to convey some at least of them as quickly
as I could. But on the other hand, how can I help believing that it was all
true? It was perhaps a thousand times brighter, happier and more joyful
than I describe it. Granted that I dreamed it, yet it must have been real.
You know, I will tell you a secret: perhaps it was not a dream at all! For
then something happened so awful, something so horribly true, that it
could not have been imagined in a dream. My heart may have originated
the dream, but would my heart alone have been capable of originating the
awful event which happened to me afterwards? How could I alone have
invented it or imagined it in my dream? Could my petty heart and fickle,
trivial mind have risen to such a revelation of truth? Oh, judge for
yourselves: hitherto I have concealed it, but now I will tell the truth. The
fact is that I . . . corrupted them all!
V
Yes, yes, it ended in my corrupting them all! How it could come to pass I
do not know, but I remember it clearly. The dream embraced thousands
of years and left in me only a sense of the whole. I only know that I was
the cause of their sin and downfall. Like a vile trichina, like a germ of the
plague infecting whole kingdoms, so I contaminated all this earth, so

 happy and sinless before my coming. They learnt to lie, grew fond of
lying, and discovered the charm of falsehood. Oh, at first perhaps it
began innocently, with a jest, coquetry, with amorous play, perhaps
indeed with a germ, but that germ of falsity made its way into their
hearts and pleased them. Then sensuality was soon begotten, sensuality
begot jealousy, jealousy - cruelty . . . Oh, I don't know, I don't
remember; but soon, very soon the first blood was shed. They marvelled
and were horrified, and began to be split up and divided. They formed
into unions, but it was against one another. Reproaches, upbraidings
followed. They came to know shame, and shame brought them to virtue.
The conception of honour sprang up, and every union began waving its
flags. They began torturing animals, and the animals withdrew from them
into the forests and became hostile to them. They began to struggle for
separation, for isolation, for individuality, for mine and thine. They began
to talk in different languages. They became acquainted with sorrow and
loved sorrow; they thirsted for suffering, and said that truth could only be
attained through suffering. Then science appeared. As they became
wicked they began talking of brotherhood and humanitarianism, and
understood those ideas. As they became criminal, they invented justice
and drew up whole legal codes in order to observe it, and to ensure their
being kept, set up a guillotine. They hardly remembered what they had
lost, in fact refused to believe that they had ever been happy and
innocent. They even laughed at the possibility o this happiness in the
past, and called it a dream. They could not even imagine it in definite
form and shape, but, strange and wonderful to relate, though they lost all
faith in their past happiness and called it a legend, they so longed to be
happy and innocent once more that they succumbed to this desire like
children, made an idol of it, set up temples and worshipped their own
idea, their own desire; though at the same time they fully believed that it
was unattainable and could not be realised, yet they bowed down to it
and adored it with tears! Nevertheless, if it could have happened that
they had returned to the innocent and happy condition which they had
lost, and if someone had shown it to them again and had asked them

 whether they wanted to go back to it, they would certainly have refused.
They answered me:
"We may be deceitful, wicked and unjust, we know it and weep over it,
we grieve over it; we torment and punish ourselves more perhaps than
that merciful Judge Who will judge us and whose Name we know not. But
we have science, and by the means of it we shall find the truth and we
shall arrive at it consciously. Knowledge is higher than feeling, the
 consciousness of life is higher than life. Science will give us wisdom,
wisdom will reveal the laws, and the knowledge of the laws of happiness
is higher than happiness."
That is what they said, and after saying such things everyone began to
love himself better than anyone else, and indeed they could not do
otherwise. All became so jealous of the rights of their own personality
that they did their very utmost to curtail and destroy them in others, and
made that the chief thing in their lives. Slavery followed, even voluntary
slavery; the weak eagerly submitted to the strong, on condition that the
latter aided them to subdue the still weaker. Then there were saints who
came to these people, weeping, and talked to them of their pride, of their
loss of harmony and due proportion, of their loss of shame. They were
laughed at or pelted with stones. Holy blood was shed on the threshold of
the temples. Then there arose men who began to think how to bring all
people together again, so that everybody, while still loving himself best of
all, might not interfere with others, and all might live together in
something like a harmonious society. Regular wars sprang up over this
idea. All the combatants at the same time firmly believed that science,
wisdom and the instinct of self-preservation would force men at last to
unite into a harmonious and rational society; and so, meanwhile, to
hasten matters, the wise endeavoured to exterminate as rapidly as
possible all who were not wise and did not understand their idea, that the
latter might not hinder its triumph. But the instinct of self-preservation
grew rapidly weaker; there arose men, haughty and sensual, who
demanded all or nothing. In order to obtain everything they resorted to

 crime, and if they did not succeed - to suicide. There arose religions with
a cult of non-existence and self-destruction for the sake of the everlasting
peace of annihilation. At last these people grew weary of their
meaningless toil, and signs of suffering came into their faces, and then 
they proclaimed that suffering was a beauty, for in suffering alone was
there meaning. They glorified suffering in their songs. I moved about
among them, wringing my hands and weeping over them, but I loved
them perhaps more than in old days when there was no suffering in their
faces and when they were innocent and so lovely. I loved the earth they
had polluted even more than when it had been a paradise, if only because
sorrow had come to it. Alas! I always loved sorrow and tribulation, but
only for myself, for myself; but I wept over them, pitying them. I
stretched out my hands to them in despair, blaming, cursing and
despising myself. I told them that all this was my doing, mine alone; that
it was I had brought them corruption, contamination and falsity. I
besought them to crucify me, I taught them how to make a cross. I could
not kill myself, I had not the strength, but I wanted to suffer at their
hands. I yearned for suffering, I longed that my blood should be drained
to the last drop in these agonies. But they only laughed at me, and began
at last to look upon me as crazy. They justified me, they declared that
they had only got what they wanted themselves, and that all that now
was could not have been otherwise. At last they declared to me that I was
becoming dangerous and that they should lock me up in a madhouse if I
did not hold my tongue. Then such grief took possession of my soul that
my heart was wrung, and I felt as though I were dying; and then . . .
then I awoke.
It was morning, that is, it was not yet daylight, but about six o'clock. I
woke up in the same arm-chair; my candle had burnt out; everyone was
asleep in the captain's room, and there was a stillness all round, rare in
our flat. First of all I leapt up in great amazement: nothing like this had
ever happened to me before, not even in the most trivial detail; I had
never, for instance, fallen asleep like this in my arm-chair. While I was
standing and coming to myself I suddenly caught sight of my revolver

 lying loaded, ready - but instantly I thrust it away! Oh, now, life, life! I
lifted up my hands and called upon eternal truth, not with words, but with
tears; ecstasy, immeasurable ecstasy flooded my soul. Yes, life and
spreading the good tidings! Oh, I at that moment resolved to spread the
tidings, and resolved it, of course, for my whole life. I go to spread the
tidings, I want to spread the tidings - of what? Of the truth, for I have
seen it, have seen it with my own eyes, have seen it in all its glory.
And since then I have been preaching! Moreover I love all those who
laugh at me more than any of the rest. Why that is so I do not know and
cannot explain, but so be it. I am told that I am vague and confused, and
if I am vague and confused now, what shall I be later on? It is true
indeed: I am vague and confused, and perhaps as time goes on I shall be
more so. And of course I shall make many blunders before I find out how
to preach, that is, find out what words to say, what things to do, for it is a
very difficult task. I see all that as clear as daylight, but, listen, who does
not make mistakes? An yet, you know, all are making for the same goal,
all are striving in the same direction anyway, from the sage to the lowest
robber, only by different roads. It is an old truth, but this is what is new:
I cannot go far wrong. For I have seen the truth; I have seen and I know
that people can be beautiful and happy without losing the power of living
on earth. I will not and cannot believe that evil is the normal condition of
mankind. And it is just this faith of mine that they laugh at. But how can I
help believing it? I have seen the truth - it is not as though I had invented
it with my mind, I have seen it, seen it, and the living image of it has
filled my soul for ever. I have seen it in such full perfection that I cannot
believe that it is impossible for people to have it. And so how can I go
wrong? I shall make some slips no doubt, and shall perhaps talk in
second-hand language, but not for long: the living image of what I saw
will always be with me and will always correct and guide me. Oh, I am full
of courage and freshness, and I will go on and on if it were for a thousand
years! Do you know, at first I meant to conceal the fact that I corrupted
them, but that was a mistake - that was my first mistake! But truth
whispered to me that I was lying, and preserved me and corrected me.

 But how establish paradise - I don't know, because I do not know how to
put it into words. After my dream I lost command of words. All the chief
words, anyway, the most necessary ones. But never mind, I shall go and
I shall keep talking, I won't leave off, for anyway I have seen it with my
own eyes, though I cannot describe what I saw. But the scoffers do not
understand that. It was a dream, they say, delirium, hallucination. Oh! As
though that meant so much! And they are so proud! A dream! What is a
dream? And is not our life a dream? I will say more. Suppose that this
paradise will never come to pass (that I understand), yet I shall go on
preaching it. And yet how simple it is: in one day, in one hour everything
could be arranged at once! The chief thing is to love others like yourself,
that's the chief thing, and that's everything; nothing else is wanted - you
will find out at once how to arrange it all. And yet it's an old truth which
has been told and retold a billion times - but it has not formed part of our
lives! The consciousness of life is higher than life, the knowledge of the
laws of happiness is higher than happiness - that is what one must
contend against. And I shall. If only everyone wants it, it can be arranged
at once.
And I tracked down that little girl . . . and I shall go on and on!
THE END
In olden times when wishing still helped one, there lived a king
whose daughters were all beautiful, but the youngest was so beautiful
that the sun itself, which has seen so much, was astonished whenever
it shone in her face.  Close by the king's castle lay a great dark
forest, and under an old lime-tree in the forest was a well, and when
the day was very warm, the king's child went out into the forest and
sat down by the side of the cool fountain, and when she was bored she
took a golden ball, and threw it up on high and caught it, and this
ball was her favorite plaything.

Now it so happened that on one occasion the princess's golden ball
did not fall into the little hand which she was holding up for it,
but on to the ground beyond, and rolled straight into the water.  The
king's daughter followed it with her eyes, but it vanished, and the
well was deep, so deep that the bottom could not be seen.  At this
she began to cry, and cried louder and louder, and could not be
comforted.  And as she thus lamented someone said to her, "What ails
you, king's daughter?  You weep so that even a stone would show pity."

She looked round to the side from whence the voice came, and saw a
frog stretching forth its big, ugly head from the water.  "Ah, old
water-splasher, is it you," she said, "I am weeping for my golden ball,
which has fallen into the well."  "Be quiet, and do not weep," answered
the frog, "I can help you, but what will you give me if I bring your
plaything up again?"  "Whatever you will have, dear frog," said she, "My
clothes, my pearls and jewels, and even the golden crown which I am
wearing."  The frog answered, "I do not care for your clothes, your
pearls and jewels, nor for your golden crown, but if you will love me
and let me be your companion and play-fellow, and sit by you at your
little table, and eat off your little golden plate, and drink out of
your little cup, and sleep in your little bed - if you will promise
me this I will go down below, and bring you your golden ball up
again."

"Oh yes," said she, "I promise you all you wish, if you will but bring
me my ball back again."  But she thought, "How the silly frog does
talk.  All he does is to sit in the water with the other frogs, and
croak.  He can be no companion to any human being."

But the frog when he had received this promise, put his head into the
water and sank down; and in a short while came swimmming up again
with the ball in his mouth, and threw it on the grass.  The king's
daughter was delighted to see her pretty plaything once more, and
picked it up, and ran away with it.  "Wait, wait," said the frog.  "Take
me with you.  I can't run as you can."  But what did it avail him to
scream his croak, croak, after her, as loudly as he could.  She did
not listen to it, but ran home and soon forgot the poor frog, who was
forced to go back into his well again.

The next day when she had seated herself at table with the king and
all the courtiers, and was eating from her little golden plate,
something came creeping splish splash, splish splash, up the marble
staircase, and when it had got to the top, it knocked at the door and
cried, "Princess, youngest princess, open the door for me."  She ran to
see who was outside, but when she opened the door, there sat the frog
in front of it.  Then she slammed the door to, in great haste, sat
down to dinner again, and was quite frightened.  The king saw plainly
that her heart was beating violently, and said, "My child, what are
you so afraid of?  Is there perchance a giant outside who wants to
carry you away?"  "Ah, no," replied she.  "It is no giant but a disgusting
frog."

"What does a frog want with you?"  "Ah, dear father, yesterday as I was
in the forest sitting by the well, playing, my golden ball fell into
the water.  And because I cried so, the frog brought it out again for
me, and because he so insisted, I promised him he should be my
companion, but I never thought he would be able to come out of his
water.  And now he is outside there, and wants to come in to me."

In the meantime it knocked a second time, and cried,  "Princess,
youngest princess,  open the door for me,  do you not know what you
said to me yesterday by the cool waters of the well.  Princess,
youngest princess,  open the door for me."

Then said the king, "That which you have promised must you perform.
Go and let him in."  She went and opened the door, and the frog hopped
in and followed her, step by step, to her chair. There he sat and
cried, "Lift me up beside you."  She delayed, until at last the king
commanded her to do it.  Once the frog was on the chair he wanted to
be on the table, and when he was on the table he said, "Now, push your
little golden plate nearer to me that we may eat together."  She did
this, but it was easy to see that she did not do it willingly.  The
frog enjoyed what he ate, but almost every mouthful she took choked
her.  At length he said, "I have eaten and am satisfied, now I am
tired, carry me into your little room and make your little silken bed
ready, and we will both lie down and go to sleep."

The king's daughter began to cry, for she was afraid of the cold frog
which she did not like to touch, and which was now to sleep in her
pretty, clean little bed.  But the king grew angry and said, "He who
helped you when you were in trouble ought not afterwards to be
despised by you."  So she took hold of the frog with two fingers,
carried him upstairs, and put him in a corner, but when she was in
bed he crept to her and said, "I am tired, I want to sleep as well as
you, lift me up or I will tell your father."  At this she was terribly
angry, and took him up and threw him with all her might against the
wall.  "Now, will you be quiet, odious frog," said she.  But when he
fell down he was no frog but a king's son with kind and beautiful
eyes.  He by her father's will was now her dear companion and
husband.  Then he told her how he had been bewitched by a wicked
witch, and how no one could have delivered him from the well but
herself, and that to-morrow they would go together into his kingdom.

Then they went to sleep, and next morning when the sun awoke them, a
carriage came driving up with eight white horses, which had white
ostrich feathers on their heads, and were harnessed with golden
chains, and behind stood the young king's servant Faithful Henry.
Faithful Henry had been so unhappy when his master was changed into a
frog, that he had caused three iron bands to be laid round his heart,
lest it should burst with grief and sadness.  The carriage was to
conduct the young king into his kingdom.  Faithful Henry helped them
both in, and placed himself behind again, and was full of joy because
of this deliverance.  And when they had driven a part of the way the
king's son heard a cracking behind him as if something had broken.
So he turned round and cried, "Henry, the carriage is breaking."
"No, master, it is not the carriage.  It is a band from my heart,
which was put there in my great pain when you were a frog and
imprisoned in the well."  Again and once again while they were on
their way something cracked, and each time the king's son thought the
carriage was breaking, but it was only the bands which were springing
from the heart of Faithful Henry because his master was set free and
was happy.
Hard by a great forest dwelt a wood-cutter with his wife, who had an
only child, a little girl three years old.  They were so poor,
however, that they no longer had daily bread, and did not know how to
get food for her.  One morning the wood-cutter went out sorrowfully
to his work in the forest, and while he was cutting wood, suddenly
there stood before him a tall and beautiful woman with a crown of
shining stars on her head, who said to him 'I am the virgin mary,
mother of the child jesus. You are poor and needy, bring your child
to me, I will take her with me and be her mother, and care for her.'
The wood-cutter obeyed, brought his child, and gave her to the virgin
mary, who took her up to heaven with her.  There the child fared
well, ate sugar-cakes, and drank sweet milk, and her clothes were of
gold, and the little angels played with her.  And when she was
fourteen years of age, the virgin mary called her one day and said
'dear child, I am about to make a long journey, so take into your
keeping the keys of the thirteen doors of heaven.  Twelve of these
you may open, and behold the glory which is within them, but the
thirteenth, to which this little key belongs, is forbidden you.  Take
care not to open it, or you will be unhappy.' The girl promised to be
obedient, and when the virgin mary was gone, she began to examine the
dwellings of the kingdom of heaven.  Each day she opened one of them,
until she had made the round of the twelve. In each of them sat one
of the apostles in the midst of a great light, and she rejoiced in
all the magnificence and splendor, and the little angels who always
accompanied her rejoiced with her. Then the forbidden door alone
remained, and she felt a great desire to know what could be hidden
behind it, and said to the angels 'I will not open it entirely, and I
will not go inside, but I will unlock it so that we can see just a
little through the opening.' 'Oh'no,  said the little angels,  'that
would be a sin.  The virgin mary has forbidden it, and it might
easily cause your unhappiness.' Then she was silent, but the desire
in her heart was not stilled, but gnawed there and tormented her, and
let her have no rest.  And once when the angels had all gone out, she
thought 'now I am quite alone, and I could peep in.  If I do, no one
will ever know.' She sought out the key, and when she had got it in
her hand, she put it in the lock, and when she had put it in, she
turned it round as well.  Then the door sprang open, and she saw
there the trinity sitting in fire and splendor.  She stayed there
awhile, and looked at everything in amazement, then she touched the
light a little with her finger, and her finger became quite golden.
Immediately a great fear fell on her.  She shut the door violently,
and ran hi there.  But her terror would not quit her, let her do what she
'Yes,  said the girl, for the second time. Then she perceived the
finger which had become golden from touching the fire of heaven, and
saw well that the child had sinned, and said for the third time 'have
you not done it.' 'No,  said the girl for the third time.  Then said
the virgin mary 'you have not obeyed me, and besides that you have
lied, you are no longer worthy to be in heaven.' Then the girl fell
into a deep sleep, and when she awoke she lay on the earth below, and
in the midst of a wilderness.  She wanted to cry out, but she could
bring forth no sound.  She sprang up and wanted to run away, but
whithersoever she turned herself, she was continually held back by
thick hedges of thorns through which she could not break.  In the
desert, in which she was imprisoned, there stood an old hollow tree,
and this had to be her dwelling-place.  Into this she crept when
night came, and here she slept.  Here, too, she found a shelter from
might, and her heart beat continually and would not be still, the gold too
stayed on her finger, and  would not go away, let  her rub it and wash  it
never so much. It was not long  before the virgin mary came back from  her
journey.  She called the girl  before her, and asked  to have the keys  of
heaven back.  When the maiden gave  her the bunch, the virgin looked  into
her eyes and said 'have you not opened the thirteenth door also.' 'No, she
replied.  Then she laid her hand on the girl's heart, and felt how it beat
and beat, and  saw right well  that she  had disobeyed her  order and  had
opened the door.  Then she said once again 'are you certain that you  have
not done it.'
storm and rain, but it was a miserable life, and bitterly did she
weep when she remembered how happy she had been in heaven, and how
the angels had played with her.  Roots and wild berries were her only
food, and for these she sought as far as she could go.  In the autumn
she picked up the fallen nuts and leaves, and carried them into the
hole.  The nuts were her food in winter, and when snow and ice came,
she crept amongst the leaves like a poor little animal that she might
not freeze.  Before long her clothes were all torn, and one bit of
them after another fell off her.  As soon, however, as the sun shone
warm again, she went out and sat in front of the tree, and her long
hair covered her on all sides like a mantle.  Thus she sat year after
year, and felt the pain and the misery of the world. One day, when
the trees were once more clothed in fresh green, the king of the
country was hunting in the forest, and followed a roe, and as it had
fled into the thicket which shut in this part of the forest, he got
off his horse, tore the bushes asunder, and cut himself a path with
his sword.  When he had at last forced his way through, he saw a
wonderfully beautiful maiden sitting under the tree, and she sat
there and was entirely covered with her golden hair down to her very
feet. He stood still and looked at her full of surprise, then he
spoke to her and said 'who are you.  Why are you sitting here in the
wilderness.' But she gave no answer, for she could not open her
mouth.  The king continued 'will you go with me to my castle.  Then
she just nodded her head a little.  The king took her in his arms,
carried her to his horse, and rode home with her, and when he reached
the royal castle he caused her to be dressed in beautiful garments,
and gave her all things in abundance.  Although she could not speak,
she was still so beautiful and charming that he began to love her
with all his heart, and it was not long before he married her. After
a year or so had passed, the queen brought a son into the world.
Thereupon the virgin mary appeared to her in the night when she lay
in her bed alone, and said 'if you will tell the truth and confess
that you did unlock the forbidden door, I will open your mouth and
give you back your speech, but if you persevere in your sin, and deny
obstinately, I will take your new-born child away with me.' The the
queen was permitted to answer, but she remained hard, and said 'no, I
did not open the forbidden door, and the virgin mary took the
new-born child from her arms, and vanished with it.  Next morning
when the child was not to be found, it was whispered among the people
that the queen was a man-eater, and had put her own child to death.
She heard all this and could say nothing to the contrary, but the
king would not believe it, for he loved her so much. When a year had
gone by the queen again bore a son, and in the night the virgin mary
again came to her, and said 'if you will confess that you opened the
forbidden door, I will give you your child back and untie your tongue
but if you continue in sin and deny it, I will take away with me this
new child also.' Then the queen again said 'no, I did not open the
forbidden door.' And the virgin took the child out of her arms, and
away with her to heaven.  Next morning, when this child also had
disappeared, the people declared quite loudly that the queen had
devoured it, and the king's councillors demanded that she should be
brought to justice.  The king however, loved her so dearly that he
would not believe it, and commanded the councillors under pain of
death not to say any more about it. The following year the queen gave
birth to a beautiful little daughter, and for the third time the
virgin mary appeared to her in the night and said 'follow me.' She
took the queen by the hand and led her to heaven, and showed her
there her two eldest children, who smiled at her, and were playing
with the ball of the world.  When the queen rejoiced thereat, the
virgin mary said 'is your heart not yet softened.  If you will own
that you opened the forbidden door, I will give you back your two
little sons.' But for the third time the queen answered 'no, I did
not open the forbidden door.' Then the virgin let her sink down to
earth once more, and took from her likewise her third child.

Next morning, when the loss was reported abroad, all the people cried
loudly 'the queen is a man-eater.  She must be judged, and the king
was no longer able to restrain his councillors. Thereupon a trial was
held, and as she could not answer, and defend herself, she was
condemned to be burnt at the stake. The wood was got together, and
when she was fast bound to the stake, and the fire began to burn
round about her, the hard ice of pride melted, her heart was moved by
repentance, and she thought 'if I could but confess before my death
that I opened the door.' Then her voice came back to her, and she
cried out loudly 'yes, mary, I did it, and straight-way rain fell
from the sky and extinguished the flames of fire, and a light broke
forth above her, and the virgin mary descended with the two little
sons by her side, and the new-born daughter in her arms.  She spoke
kindly to her, and said 'he who repents his sin and acknowledges it,
is forgiven.' Then she gave her the three children, untied her
tongue, and granted her happiness for her whole life.

A certain father had two sons, the elder of whom was smart and
sensible, and could do everything, but the younger was stupid and
could neither learn nor understand anything, and when people saw him
they said 'there's a fellow who will give his father some trouble.'
When anything had to be done, it was always the elder who was forced
to do it, but if his father bade him fetch anything when it was late,
or in the night-time, and the way led through the churchyard, or any
other dismal place, he answered 'oh, no, father, I'll not go there,
it makes me shudder.' For he was afraid.  Or when stories were told
by the fire at night which made the flesh creep, the listeners
sometimes said 'oh, it makes us shudder.' The younger sat in a corner
and listened with the rest of them, and could not imagine what they
could mean.  'They are always saying 'it makes me shudder, it makes
me shudder,  it does not make me shudder.' Thought he.  'That, too,
must be an art of which I understand nothing.'

Now it came to pass that his father said to him one day 'hearken to
me, you fellow in the corner there, you are growing tall and strong,
and you too must learn something by which you can earn your bread.
Look how your brother works, but you do not even earn your salt.'
'Well, father, he replied,  'I am quite willing to learn something -
indeed, if it could but be managed, I should like to learn how to
shudder.  I don't understand that at all yet.' The elder brother
smiled when he heard that, and thought to himself 'good God, what a
blockhead that brother of mine is.  He will never be good for
anything as long as he lives.  He who wants to be a sickle must bend
himself betimes.' The father sighed, and answered him 'you shall soon
learn what it is to shudder, but you will not earn your bread by
that.' Soon after this the sexton came to the house on a visit, and
the father bewailed his trouble, and told him how his younger son was
so backward in every respect that he knew nothing and learnt nothing.
'Just think,  said he,  'when I asked him how he was going to earn
his bread, he actually wanted to learn to shudder.' 'If that be all,
replied the sexton,  'he can learn that with me.  Send him to me, and
I will soon polish him.' The father was glad to do it, for he thought
'it will train the boy a little.' The sexton therefore took him into
his house, and he had to ring the church bell.  After a day or two,
the sexton awoke him at midnight, and bade him arise and go up into
the church tower and ring the bell. 'You shall soon learn what
shuddering is,  thought he, and secretly went there before him, and
when the boy was at the top of the tower and turned round, and was
just going to take hold of the bell rope, he saw a white figure
standing on the stairs opposite the sounding hole.  'Who is there.'
Cried he, but the figure made no reply, and did not move or stir.
'Give an answer,  cried the boy,  'or take yourself off, you have no
business here at night.'

The sexton, however, remained standing motionless that the boy might
think he was a ghost.  The boy cried a second time 'what do you want
here. - Speak if you are an honest fellow, or I will throw you down
the steps.' The sexton thought 'he can't mean to be as bad as his
words,  uttered no sound and stood as if he were made of stone.  Then
the boy called to him for the third time, and as that was also to no
purpose, he ran against him and pushed the ghost down the stairs, so
that it fell down ten steps and remained lying there in a corner.
Thereupon he rang the bell, went home, and without saying a word went
to bed, and fell asleep.  The sexton's wife waited a long time for
her husband, but he did not come back.  At length she became uneasy,
and wakened the boy, and asked 'do you not know where my husband is.
He climbed up the tower before you did.' 'No, I don't know, replied
the boy,  'but someone was standing by the sounding hole on the other
side of the steps, and as he would neither give an answer nor go
away, I took him for a scoundrel, and threw him downstairs.  Just go
there and you will see if it was he.  I should be sorry if it were.'
The woman ran away and found her husband, who was lying moaning in
the corner, and had broken his leg.

She carried him down, and then with loud screams she hastened to the
boy's father.  'Your boy,  cried she,  'has been the cause of a great
misfortune.  He has thrown my husband down the steps so that he broke
his leg.  Take the good-for-nothing fellow out of our house.' The
father was terrified, and ran thither and scolded the boy.  'What
wicked tricks are these.' Said he,  'the devil must have put them
into your head.' 'Father,  he replied, 'do listen to me.  I am quite
innocent.  He was standing there by night like one intent on doing
evil.  I did not know who it was, and I entreated him three times
either to speak or to go away.' 'Ah,  said the father,  'I have
nothing but unhappiness with you.  Go out of my sight.  I will see
you no more.'

'Yes, father, right willingly, wait only until it is day.  Then will
I go forth and learn how to shudder, and then I shall, at any rate,
understand one art which will support me.' 'Learn what you will,
spoke the father,  'it is all the same to me. Here are fifty talers
for you.  Take these and go into the wide world, and tell no one from
whence you come, and who is your father, for I have reason to be
ashamed of you.' 'Yes, father, it shall be as you will.  If you
desire nothing more than that, I can easily keep it in mind.'

When day dawned, therefore, the boy put his fifty talers into his
pocket, and went forth on the great highway, and continually said to
himself 'if I could but shudder.  If I could but shudder.' Then a man
approached who heard this conversation which the youth was holding
with himself, and when they had walked a little farther to where they
could see the gallows, the man said to him 'look, there is the tree
where seven men have married the ropemaker's daughter, and are now
learning how to fly.  Sit down beneath it, and wait till night comes,
and you will soon learn how to shudder.' 'If that is all that is
wanted, answered the youth,  'it is easily done, but if I learn how
to shudder as fast as that, you shall have my fifty talers.  Just
come back to me early in the morning.' Then the youth went to the
gallows, sat down beneath it, and waited till evening came. And as he
was cold, he lighted himself a fire, but at midnight the wind blew so
sharply that in spite of his fire, he could not get warm.  And as the
wind knocked the hanged men against each other, and they moved
backwards and forwards, he thought to himself 'if you shiver below by
the fire, how those up above must freeze and suffer.' And as he felt
pity for them, he raised the ladder, and climbed up, unbound one of
them after the other, and brought down all seven.  Then he stoked the
fire, blew it, and set them all round it to warm themselves.  But
they sat there and did not stir, and the fire caught their clothes.
So he said 'take care, or I will hang you up again.' The dead men,
however, did not hear, but were quite silent, and let their rags go
on burning.  At this he grew angry, and said 'if you will not take
care, I cannot help you, I will not be burnt with you,  and he hung
them up again each in his turn. Then he sat down by his fire and fell
asleep, and the next morning the man came to him and wanted to have
the fifty talers, and said 'well, do you know how to shudder.' 'No,
answered he,  'how should I know.  Those fellows up there did not
open their mouths, and were so stupid that they let the few old rags
which they had on their bodies get burnt.' Then the man saw that he
would not get the fifty talers that day, and went away saying 'such a
youth has never come my way before.' The youth likewise went his way,
and once more began to mutter to himself 'ah, if I could but shudder.
Ah, if I could but shudder.' A waggoner who was striding behind him
heard this and asked 'who are you.' 'I don't know, answered the
youth.  Then the waggoner asked 'from whence do you come.' 'I know
not.' 'Who is your father.' 'That I may not tell you.' 'What is it
that you are always muttering between your teeth.' 'Ah, replied the
youth,  'I do so wish I could shudder, but no one can teach me how.'
'Enough of your foolish chatter,  said the waggoner.  'Come, go with
me, I will see about a place for you.' The youth went with the
waggoner, and in the evening they arrived at an inn where they wished
to pass the night.  Then at the entrance of the parlor the youth
again said quite loudly 'if I could but shudder.  If I could but
shudder.' The host who heard this, laughed and said 'if that is your
desire, there ought to be a good opportunity for you here.' 'Ah, be
silent,  said the hostess,  'so many prying persons have already lost
their lives, it would be a pity and a shame if such beautiful eyes as
these should never see the daylight again.' But the youth said
'however difficult it may be, I will learn it.  For this purpose
indeed have I journeyed forth.' He let the host have no rest, until
the latter told him, that not far from thence stood a haunted castle
where any one could very easily learn what shuddering was, if he
would but watch in it for three nights.  The king had promised that
he who would venture should have his daughter to wife, and she was
the most beautiful maiden the sun shone on.  Likewise in the castle
lay great treasures, which were guarded by evil spirits, and these
treasures would then be freed, and would make a poor man rich enough.
Already many men had gone into the castle, but as yet none had come
out again.  Then the youth went next morning to the king and said 'if
it be allowed, I will willingly watch three nights in the haunted
castle.' The king looked at him, and as the youth pleased him, he
said 'you may ask for three things to take into the castle with you,
but they must be things without life.' Then he answered 'then I ask
for a fire, a turning lathe, and a cutting-board with the knife.' The
king had these things carried into the castle for him during the day.
When night was drawing near, the youth went up and made himself a
bright fire in one of the rooms, placed the cutting-board and knife
beside it, and seated himself by the turning-lathe.  'Ah, if I could
but shudder.' Said he,  'but I shall not learn it here either.'
Towards midnight he was about to poke his fire, and as he was blowing
it, something cried suddenly from one corner 'au, miau.  How cold we
are.' 'You fools.' Cried he,  'what are you crying about.  If you are
cold, come and take a seat by the fire and warm yourselves.' And when
he had said that, two great black cats came with one tremendous leap
and sat down on each side of him, and looked savagely at him with
their fiery eyes.  After a short time, when they had warmed
themselves, they said 'comrade, shall we have a game of cards.' 'Why
not.' He replied,  'but just show me your paws.' Then they stretched
out their claws.  'Oh, said he,  'what long nails you have.  Wait, I
must first cut them for you.' Thereupon he seized them by the
throats, put them on the cutting-board and screwed their feet fast.
'I have looked at your fingers,  said he,  'and my fancy for
card-playing has gone, and he struck them dead and threw them out
into the water.  But when he had made away with these two, and was
about to sit down again by his fire, out from every hole and corner
came black cats and black dogs with red-hot chains, and more and more
of them came until he could no longer move, and they yelled horribly,
and got on his fire, pulled it to pieces, and tried to put it out.
He watched them for a while quietly, but at last when they were going
too far, he seized his cutting-knife, and cried 'away with you,
vermin, and began to cut them down. Some of them ran away, the others
he killed, and threw out into the fish-pond.  When he came back he
fanned the embers of his fire again and warmed himself.  And as he
thus sat, his eyes would keep open no longer, and he felt a desire to
sleep.  Then he looked round and saw a great bed in the corner.
'That is the very thing for me,  said he, and got into it.  When he
was just going to shut his eyes, however, the bed began to move of
its own accord, and went over the whole of the castle. 'That's right,
said he,  'but go faster.' Then the bed rolled on as if six horses
were harnessed to it, up and down, over thresholds and stairs, but
suddenly hop, hop, it turned over upside down, and lay on him like a
mountain.  But he threw quilts and pillows up in the air, got out and
said 'now any one who likes, may drive, and lay down by his fire, and
slept till it was day.  In the morning the king came, and when he saw
him lying there on the ground, he thought the evil spirits had killed
him and he was dead.  Then said he 'after all it is a pity, -- for so
handsome a man.' The youth heard it, got up, and said 'it has not
come to that yet.' Then the king was astonished, but very glad, and
asked how he had fared.  'Very well indeed, answered he,  'one night
is past, the two others will pass likewise.' Then he went to the
innkeeper, who opened his eyes very wide, and said 'I never expected
to see you alive again.  Have you learnt how to shudder yet.' 'No,
said he,  'it is all in vain.  If some one would but tell me.' The
second night he again went up into the old castle, sat down by the
fire, and once more began his old song 'if I could but shudder.' When
midnight came, an uproar and noise of tumbling about was heard, at
first it was low, but it grew louder and louder.  Then it was quiet
for a while, and at length with a loud scream, half a man came down
the chimney and fell before him.  'Hullo.' Cried he,  'another half
belongs to this.  This is not enough.' Then the uproar began again,
there was a roaring and howling, and the other half fell down
likewise.  'Wait, said he,  'I will just stoke up the fire a little
for you.' When he had done that and looked round again, the two
pieces were joined together, and a hideous man was sitting in his
place. 'That is no part of our bargain,  said the youth,  'the bench
is mine.' The man wanted to push him away, the youth, however, would
not allow that, but thrust him off with all his strength, and seated
himself again in his own place.  Then still more men fell down, one
after the other, they brought nine dead men's legs and two skulls,
and set them up and played at nine-pins with them. The youth also
wanted to play and said 'listen you, can I join you.' 'Yes, if you
have any money.' Money enough, replied he,  'but your balls are not
quite round.' Then he took the skulls and put them in the lathe and
turned them till they were round.  'There, now they will roll
better.' Said he. 'Hurrah.  Now we'll have fun.' He played with them
and lost some of his money, but when it struck twelve, everything
vanished from his sight.  He lay down and quietly fell asleep.  Next
morning the king came to inquire after him.  'How has it fared with
you this time.' Asked he.  'I have been playing at nine-pins,  he
answered,  'and have lost a couple of farthings.' 'Have you not
shuddered then.' 'What.' Said he,  'I have had a wonderful time.  If
I did but know what it was to shudder.' The third night he sat down
again on his bench and said quite sadly 'if I could but shudder.'
When it grew late, six tall men came in and brought a coffin.  Then
said he 'ha, ha, that is certainly my little cousin, who died only a
few days ago, and he beckoned with his finger, and cried 'come,
little cousin, come.' They placed the coffin on the ground, but he
went to it and took the lid off, and a dead man lay therein. He felt
his face, but it was cold as ice.  'Wait, said he,  'I will warm you
a little, and went to the fire and warmed his hand and laid it on the
dead man's face, but he remained cold.  Then he took him out, and sat
down by the fire and laid him on his breast and rubbed his arms that
the blood might circulate again.  As this also did no good, he
thought to himself 'when two people lie in bed together, they warm
each other, and carried him to the bed, covered him over and lay down
by him.  After a short time the dead man became warm too, and began
to move. Then said the youth,  'see, little cousin, have I not warmed
you.' The dead man, however, got up and cried 'now will I strangle
you.' 'What.' Said he,  'is that the way you thank me.  You shall at
once go into your coffin again,  and he took him up, threw him into
it, and shut the lid.  Then came the six men and carried him away
again.  'I cannot manage to shudder, said he.  'I shall never learn
it here as long as I live.' Then a man entered who was taller than
all others, and looked terrible.  He was old, however, and had a long
white beard. 'You wretch,  cried he,  'you shall soon learn what it
is to shudder, for you shall die.' 'Not so fast, replied the youth.
'If I am to die, I shall have to have a say in it.' 'I will soon
seize you, said the fiend.  'Softly, softly, do not talk so big.  I
am as strong as you are, and perhaps even stronger.' 'We shall see,
said the old man.  'If you are stronger, I will let you go - come, we
will try.' Then he led him by dark passages to a smith's forge, took
an axe, and with one blow struck an anvil into the ground.  'I can do
better than that, said the youth, and went to the other anvil.  The
old man placed himself near and wanted to look on, and his white
beard hung down.  Then the youth seized the axe, split the anvil with
one blow, and in it caught the old man's beard.  'Now I have you,
said the youth.  'Now it is your turn to die.' Then he seized an iron
bar and beat the old man till he moaned and entreated him to stop,
when he would give him great riches. The youth drew out the axe and
let him go.  The old man led him back into the castle, and in a
cellar showed him three chests full of gold. 'Of these, said he,
'one part is for the poor, the other for the king, the third yours.'
In the meantime it struck twelve, and the spirit disappeared, so that
the youth stood in darkness.  'I shall still be able to find my way
out, said he and felt about, found the way into the room, and slept
there by his fire.  Next morning the king came and said 'now you must
have learnt what shuddering is.' 'No, he answered 'what can it be.
My dead cousin was here, and a bearded man came and showed me a great
deal of money down below, but no one told me what it was to shudder.'
'Then, said the king,  'you have saved the castle, and shall marry my
daughter.' 'That is all very well, said he,  'but still I do not know
what it is to shudder.' Then the gold was brought up and the wedding
celebrated, but howsoever much the young king loved his wife, and
however happy he was, he still said always 'if I could but shudder -
if I could but shudder.' And this at last angered her.  Her
waiting-maid said 'I will find a cure for him, he shall soon learn
what it is to shudder.  She went out to the stream which flowed
through the garden, and had a whole bucketful of gudgeons brought to
her.

At night when the young king was sleeping, his wife was to draw the
clothes off him and empty the bucketful of cold water with the
gudgeons in it over him, so that the little fishes would sprawl about
him.  Then he woke up and cried 'oh, what makes me shudder so. - What
makes me shudder so, dear wife.  Ah. Now I know what it is to
shudder.'

There was once upon a time an old goat who had seven little kids, and
loved them with all the love of a mother for her children. One day
she wanted to go into the forest and fetch some food. So she called
all seven to her and said, dear children, I have to go into the
forest, be on your guard against the wolf, if he comes in, he will
devour you all - skin, hair, and everything.  The wretch often
disguises himself, but you will know him at once by his rough voice
and his black feet.  The kids said, dear mother, we will take good
care of ourselves, you may go away without any anxiety.  Then the old
one bleated, and went on her way with an easy mind.

It was not long before some one knocked at the house-door and called,
open the door, dear children, your mother is here, and has brought
something back with her for each of you.  But the little kids knew
that it was the wolf, by the rough voice.  We will not open the door,
cried they, you are not our mother.  She has a soft, pleasant voice,
but your voice is rough, you are the wolf.  Then the wolf went away
to a shopkeeper and bought himself a great lump of chalk, ate this
and made his voice soft with it. The he came back, knocked at the
door of the house, and called, open the door, dear children, your
mother is here and has brought something back with her for each of
you.  But the wolf had laid his black paws against the window, and
the children saw them and cried, we will not open the door, our
mother has not black feet like you, you are the wolf.  Then the wolf
ran to a baker and said, I have hurt my feet, rub some dough over
them for me.  And when the baker had rubbed his feet over, he ran to
the miller and said, strew some white meal over my feet for me.  The
miller thought to himself, the wolf wants to deceive someone, and
refused, but the wolf said, if you will not do it, I will devour you.
Then the miller was afraid, and made his paws white for him. Truly,
this the way of mankind.

So now the wretch went for the third time to the house-door, knocked
at it and said, open the door for me, children, your dear little
mother has come home, and has brought every one of you something back
from the forest with her.  The little kids cried, first show us your
paws that we may know if you are our dear little mother.  Then he put
his paws in through the window, and when the kids saw that they were
white, they believed that all he said was true, and opened the door.
But who should come in but the wolf they were terrified and wanted to
hide themselves.  One sprang under the table, the second into the
bed, the third into the stove, the fourth into the kitchen, the fifth
into the cupboard, the sixth under the washing-bowl, and the seventh
into the clock-case.  But the wolf found them all, and used no great
ceremony, one after the other he swallowed them down his throat.  The
youngest, who was in the clock-case, was the only one he did not
find. When the wolf had satisfied his appetite he took himself off,
laid himself down under a tree in the green meadow outside, and began
to sleep.  Soon afterwards the old goat came home again from the
forest.  Ah.  What a sight she saw there.  The house-door stood wide
open.  The table, chairs, and benches were thrown down, the
washing-bowl lay broken to pieces, and the quilts and pillows were
pulled off the bed.  She sought her children, but they were nowhere
to be found.  She called them one after another by name, but no one
answered.  At last, when she caame to the youngest, a soft voice
cried, dear mother, I am in the clock-case.  She took the kid out,
and it told her that the wolf had come and had eaten all the others.
Then you may imagine how she wept over her poor children.

At length in her grief she went out, and the youngest kid ran with
her.  When they came to the meadow, there lay the wolf by the tree
and snored so loud that the branches shook.  She looked at him on
every side and saw that something was moving and struggling in his
gorged belly.  Ah, heavens, she said, is it possible that my poor
children whom he has swallowed down for his supper, can be still
alive.  Then the kid had to run home and fetch scissors, and a needle
and thread and the goat cut open the monster's stomach, and hardly
had she make one cut, than one little kid thrust its head out, and
when she cut farther, all six sprang out one after another, and were
all still alive, and had suffered no injury whatever, for in his
greediness the monster had swallowed them down whole.  What rejoicing
there was.  They embraced their dear mother, and jumped like a sailor
at his wedding.  The mother, however, said, now go and look for some
big stones, and we will fill the wicked beast's stomach with them
while he is still asleep.  Then the seven kids dragged the stones
thither with all speed, and put as many of them into his stomach as
they could get in, and the mother sewed him up again in the greatest
haste, so that he was not aware of anything and never once stirred.

When the wolf at length had had his fill of sleep, he got on his
legs, and as the stones in his stomach made him very thirsty, he
wanted to go to a well to drink.  But when he began to walk and move
about, the stones in his stomach knocked against each other and
rattled.  Then cried he,  what rumbles and tumbles against my poor
bones.  I thought 'twas six kids,  but it feels like big stones. And
when he got to the well and stooped over the water to drink, the
heavy stones made him fall in, and he had to drown miserably.  When
the seven kids saw that, they came running to the spot and cried
aloud, the wolf is dead.  The wolf is dead, and danced for joy round
about the well with their mother.
There was once upon a time an old king who was ill and thought to
himself 'I am lying on what must be my deathbed.' Then said he 'tell
faithful John to come to me.' Faithful John was his favorite servant,
and was so called, because he had for his whole life long been so
true to him.  When therefore he came beside the bed, the king said to
him 'most faithful John, I feel my end approaching, and have no
anxiety except about my son.  He is still of tender age, and cannot
always know how to guide himself.  If you do not promise me to teach
him everything that he ought to know, and to be his foster-father, I
cannot close my eyes in peace.' Then answered faithful John 'I will
not forsake him, and will serve him with fidelity, even if it should
cost me my life.' At this, the old king said 'now I die in comfort
and peace.' Then he added 'after my death, you shall show him the
whole castle - all the chambers, halls, and vaults, and all the
treasures which lie therein, but the last chamber in the long
gallery, in which is the picture of the princess of the golden
dwelling, shall you not show.  If he sees that picture, he will fall
violently in love with her, and will drop down in a swoon, and go
through great danger for her sake, therefore you must protect him
from that.' And when faithful John had once more given his promise to
the old king about this, the king said no more, but laid his head on
his pillow, and died.

When the old king had been carried to his grave, faithful John told
the young king all that he had promised his father on his deathbed,
and said 'this will I assuredly keep, and will be faithful to you as
I have been faithful to him, even if it should cost me my life.' When
the mourning was over, faithful John said to him 'it is now time that
you should see your inheritance.  I will show you your father's
palace.' Then he took him about everywhere, up and down, and let him
see all the riches, and the magnificent apartments, only there was
one room which he did not open, that in which hung the dangerous
picture.  The picture, however, was so placed that when the door was
opened you looked straight on it, and it was so admirably painted
that it seemed to breathe and live, and there was nothing more
charming or more beautiful in the whole world.  The young king
noticed, however, that faithful John always walked past this one
door, and said 'why do you never open this one for me.' 'There is
something within it, he replied,  'which would terrify you.' But the
king answered 'I have seen all the palace, and I want to know what is
in this room also, and he went and tried to break open the door by
force.  Then faithful John held him back and said 'I promised your
father before his death that you should not see that which is in this
chamber, it might bring the greatest misfortune on you and on me.'
'Ah, no, replied the young king,  'if I do not go in, it will be my
certain destruction.  I should have no rest day or night until I had
seen it with my own eyes.  I shall not leave the place now until you
have unlocked the door.'

Then faithful John saw that there was no help for it now, and with a
heavy heart and many sighs, sought out the key from the great bunch.
When he opened the door, he went in first, and thought by standing
before him he could hide the portrait so that the king should not see
it in front of him.  But what good was this.  The king stood on
tip-toe and saw it over his shoulder.  And when he saw the portrait
of the maiden, which was so magnificent and shone with gold and
precious stones, he fell fainting to the ground.  Faithful John took
him up, carried him to his bed, and sorrowfully thought 'the
misfortune has befallen us, Lord God, what will be the end of it.'
Then he strengthened him with wine, until he came to himself again.
The first words the king said were 'ah, the beautiful portrait.
Whose it it.' 'That is the princess of the golden dwelling, answered
faithful John.  Then the king continued 'my love for her is so great,
that if all the leaves on all the trees were tongues, they could not
declare it.  I will give my life to win her.  You are my most
faithful John, you must help me.

The faithful servant considered within himself for a long time how to
set about the matter, for it was difficult even to obtain a sight of
the king's daughter.  At length he thought of a way, and said to the
king 'everything which she has about her is of gold - tables, chairs,
dishes, glasses, bowls, and household furniture.  Among your
treasures are five tons of gold, let one of the goldsmiths of the
kingdom fashion these into all manner of vessels and utensils, into
all kinds of birds, wild beasts and strange animals, such as may
please her, and we will go there with them and try our luck.'

The king ordered all the goldsmiths to be brought to him, and they
had to work night and day until at last the most splendid things were
prepared.  When everything was stowed on board a ship, faithful John
put on the dress of a merchant, and the king was forced to do the
same in order to make himself quite unrecognizable.  Then they sailed
across the sea, and sailed on until they came to the town wherein
dwelt the princess of the golden dwelling.

Faithful John bade the king stay behind on the ship, and wait for
him.  'Perhaps I shall bring the princess with me,  said he,
'therefore see that everything is in order, have the golden vessels
set out and the whole ship decorated.' Then he gathered together in
his apron all kinds of golden things, went on shore and walked
straight to the royal palace. When he entered the courtyard of the
palace, a beautiful girl was standing there by the well with two
golden buckets in her hand, drawing water with them.  And when she
was just turning round to carry away the sparkling water she saw the
stranger, and asked who he was.  So he answered 'I am a merchant, and
opened his apron, and let her look in.  Then she cried 'oh, what
beautiful golden things.' And put her pails down and looked at the
golden wares one after the other.  Then said the girl 'the princess
must see these, she has such great pleasure in golden things, that
she will buy all you have.' She took him by the hand and led him
upstairs, for she was the waiting-maid. When the king's daughter saw
the wares, she was quite delighted and said 'they are so beautifully
worked, that I will buy them all from you.' But faithful John said 'I
am only the servant of a rich merchant.  The things I have here are
not to be compared with those my master has in his ship.  They are
the most beautiful and valuable things that have ever been made in
gold.' When she wanted to have everything brought up to her, he said
'there are so many of them that it would take a great many days to do
that, and so many rooms would be required to exhibit them, that your
house is not big enough.' Then her curiosity and longing were still
more excited, until at last she said 'conduct me to the ship, I will
go there myself, and behold the treasures of your master.' At this
faithful John was quite delighted, and led her to the ship, and when
the king saw her, he perceived that her beauty was even greater than
the picture had represented it to be, and thought no other than that
his heart would burst in twain.  Then she boarded the ship, and the
king led her within.  Faithful John, however, remained with the
helmsman, and ordered the ship to be pushed off, saying 'set all
sail, till it fly like a bird in the air.' Within, the king showed
her the golden vessels, every one of them, also the wild beasts and
strange animals.  Many hours went by whilst she was seeing
everything, and in her delight she did not observe that the ship was
sailing away.  After she had looked at the last, she thanked the
merchant and wanted to go home, but when she came to the side of the
ship, she saw that it was on the high seas far from land, and
hurrying onwards with all sail set.  'Ah,  cried she in her alarm, 'I
am betrayed.  I am carried away and have fallen into the power of a
merchant - I would rather die.' The king, however, seized her hand,
and said 'I am not a merchant.  I am a king, and of no meaner origin
than you are, and if I have carried you away with subtlety, that has
come to pass because of my exceeding great love for you.  The first
time that I looked on your portrait, I fell fainting to the ground.'
When the princess of the golden dwelling heard this, she was
comforted, and her heart was drawn to him, so that she willingly
consented to be his wife. It so happened, while they were sailing
onwards over the deep sea, that faithful John, who was sitting on the
fore part of the vessel, making music, saw three ravens in the air,
which came flying towards them.  At this he stopped playing and
listened to what they were saying to each other, for that he well
understood.  One cried 'oh, there he is carrying home the princess of
the golden dwelling.' 'Yes, replied the second,  'but he has not got
her yet.' Said the third 'but he has got her, she is sitting beside
him in the ship.' Then the first began again, and cried 'what good
will that do him.  When they reach land a chestnut horse will leap
forward to meet him, and the prince will want to mount it, but if he
does that, it will run away with him, and rise up into the air, and
he will never see his maiden more.' Spoke the second 'but is there no
escape.' 'Oh, yes, if someone else mounts it swiftly, and takes out
the pistol which he will find in its holster, and shoots the horse
dead, the young king is saved.  But who knows that. And whosoever
does know it, and tells it to him, will be turned to stone from the
toe to the knee.' Then said the second 'I know more than that, even
if the horse be killed, the young king will still not keep his bride.
When they go into the castle together, a wrought bridal garment will
be lying there in a dish, and looking as if it were woven of gold and
silver,  it is, however, nothing but sulphur and pitch, and if he put
it on, it will burn him to the very bone and marrow.' Said the third
'is there no escape at all.' 'Oh, yes, replied the second,  'if any
one with gloves on seizes the garment and throws it into the fire and
burns it, the young king will be saved.  But what good will that do.
Whosoever knows it and tells it to him, half his body will become
stone from the knee to the heart.' Then said the third 'I know still
more, even if the bridal garment be burnt, the young king will still
not have his bride. After the wedding, when the dancing begins and
the young queen is dancing, she will suddenly turn pale and fall down
as if dead, and if some one does not lift her up and draw three drops
of blood from her right breast and spit them out again, she will die.
But if any one who knows that were to declare it, he would become
stone from the crown of his head to the sole of his foot.' When the
ravens had spoken of this together, they flew onwards, and faithful
John had well understood everything, but from that time forth he
became quiet and sad, for if he concealed what he had heard from his
master, the latter would be unfortunate, and if he disclosed it to
him, he himself must sacrifice his life.  At length, however, he said
to himself 'I will save my master, even if it bring destruction on
myself.' When therefore they came to shore, all happened as had been
foretold by the ravens, and a magnificent chestnut horse sprang
forward.  'Good, said the king,  'he shall carry me to my palace,
and was about to mount it when faithful John got before him, jumped
quickly on it, drew the pistol out of the holster, and shot the
horse.  Then the other attendants of the king, who were not very fond
of faithful John, cried 'how shameful to kill the beautiful animal,
that was to have carried the king to his palace.' But the king said
'hold your peace and leave him alone, he is my most faithful John.
Who knows what good may come of this.' They went into the palace, and
in the hall there stood a dish, and therein lay the bridal garment
looking no otherwise than as if it were made of gold and silver.  The
young king went towards it and was about to take hold of it, but
faithful John pushed him away, seized it with gloves on, carried it
quickly to the fire and burnt it.  The other attendants again began
to murmur, and said 'behold, now he is even burning the king's bridal
garment.' But the young king said 'who knows what good he may have
done, leave him alone, he is my most faithful John.' And now the
wedding was solemnized - the dance began, and the bride also took
part in it, then faithful John was watchful and looked into her face,
and suddenly she turned pale and fell to the ground as if she were
dead.  On this he ran hastily to her, lifted her up and bore her into
a chamber - then he laid her down, and knelt and sucked the three
drops of blood from her right breast, and spat them out.  Immediately
she breathed again and recovered herself, but the young king had seen
this, and being ignorant why faithful John had done it, was angry and
cried 'throw him into a dungeon.' Next morning faithful John was
condemned, and led to the gallows, and when he stood on high, and was
about to be executed, he said 'every one who has to die is permitted
before his end to make one last speech, may I too claim the right.'
'Yes, answered the king,  'it shall be granted unto you.' Then said
faithful John 'I am unjustly condemned, and have always been true to
you,  and he related how he had hearkened to the conversation of the
ravens when on the sea, and how he had been obliged to do all these
things in order to save his master.  Then cried the king 'oh, my most
faithful John.  Pardon, pardon - bring him down.' But as faithful
John spoke the last word he had fallen down lifeless and become a
stone.

Thereupon the king and the queen suffered great anguish, and the king
said 'ah, how ill I have requited great fidelity.' And ordered the
stone figure to be taken up and placed in his bedroom beside his bed.
And as often as he looked on it he wept and said 'ah, if I could
bring you to life again, my most faithful John.'

Some time passed and the queen bore twins, two sons who grew fast and
were her delight.  Once when the queen was at church and the father
was sitting with his two children playing beside him, he looked at
the stone figure again, sighed, and full of grief he said 'ah, if I
could but bring you to life again, my most faithful John.' Then the
stone began to speak and said 'you can bring me to life again if you
will use for that purpose what is dearest to you.' Then cried the
king 'I will give everything I have in the world for you.' The stone
continued 'if you will cut off the heads of your two children with
your own hand, and sprinkle me with their blood, I shall be restored
to life.'

The king was terrified when he heard that he himself must kill his
dearest children, but he thought of faithful John's great fidelity,
and how he had died for him, drew his sword, and with his own hand
cut off the children's heads.  And when he had smeared the stone with
their blood, life returned to it, and faithful John stood once more
safe and healthy before him. He said to the king 'your truth shall
not go unrewarded, and took the heads of the children, put them on
again, and rubbed the wounds with their blood, at which they became
whole again immediately, and jumped about, and went on playing as if
nothing had happened.  Then the king was full of joy, and when he saw
the queen coming he hid faithful John and the two children in a great
cupboard.  When she entered, he said to her 'have you been praying in
the church.' 'Yes, answered she, 'but I have constantly been thinking
of faithful John and what misfortune has befallen him through us.'
Then said he 'dear wife, we can give him his life again, but it will
cost us our two little sons, whom we must sacrifice.' The queen
turned pale, and her heart was full of terror, but she said 'we owe
it to him, for his great fidelity.' Then the king was rejoiced that
she thought as he had thought, and went and opened the cupboard, and
brought forth faithful John and the children, and said 'God be
praised, he is delivered, and we have our little sons again also,
and told her how everything had occurred.  Then they dwelt together
in much happiness until their death.
There was once a peasant who had driven his cow to the fair, and sold
her for seven talers.  On the way home he had to pass a pond, and
already from afar he heard the frogs crying, aik, aik, aik, aik.
Well, said he to himself, they are talking without rhyme or reason,
it is seven that I have received, not eight. When he got to the
water, he cried to them, stupid animals that you are.  Don't you know
better than that.  It is seven thalers and not eight.  The frogs,
however, stuck to their, aik aik, aik, aik.  Come, then, if you won't
believe it, I can count it out to you.  And he took his money out of
his pocket and counted out the seven talers, always reckoning four
and twenty groschen to a taler.  The frogs, however, paid no
attention to his reckoning, but still cried, aik, aik, aik, aik.
What, cried the peasant, quite angry, if you know better than I,
count it yourselves, and threw all the money at them into the water.
He stood still and wanted to wait until they were through and had
returned to him what was his, but the frogs maintained their opinion
and cried continually, aik, aik, aik, aik.  And besides that, did not
throw the money out again.  He still waited a long while until
evening came on and he was forced to go home. Then he abused the
frogs and cried, you water-splashers, you thick-heads, you
goggle-eyes, you have great mouths and can screech till you hurt
one's ears, but you cannot count seven talers.  Do you think I'm
going to stand here till you get through.  And with that he went
away, but the frogs still cried, aik, aik, aik, aik, after him till
he went home sorely vexed. After a while he bought another cow, which
he slaughtered, and he made the calculation that if he sold the meat
well he might gain as much as the two cows were worth, and have the
hide into the bargain.  When therefore he got to the town with the
meat, a great pack of dogs were gathered together in front of the
gate, with a large greyhound at the head of them, which jumped at the
meat, sniffed at it, and barked, wow, wow, wow.  As there was no
stopping him, the peasant said to him, yes, yes, I know quite well
that you are saying wow, wow, wow, because you want some of the meat,
but I should be in a fine state if I were to give it to you.  The
dog, however, answered nothing but wow, wow.  Will you promise not to
devour it all then, and will you go bail for your companions.  Wow,
wow, wow, said the dog.  Well, if you insist on it, I will leave it
for you, I know you well, and know whom you serve, but this I tell
you, I must have my money in three days or else it will go ill with
you, you can just bring it out to me.  Thereupon he unloaded the meat
and turned back again.  The dogs fell upon it and loudly barked, wow,
wow. The countryman, who heard them from afar, said to himself, hark,
now they all want some, but the big one is responsible to me for it.
When three days had passed, the countryman thought, to-night my money
will be in my pocket, and was quite delighted.  But no one would come
and pay it.  There is no trusting any one now, said he. At last he
lost patience, and went into the town to the butcher and demanded his
money.  The butcher thought it was a joke, but the peasant said,
jesting apart, I will have my money.  Did not the big dog bring you
the whole of the slaughtered cow three days ago.  Then the butcher
grew angry, snatched a broomstick and drove him out.  Wait, said the
peasant, there is still some justice in the world, and went to the
royal palace and begged for an audience.  He was led before the king,
who sat there with his daughter, and asked him what injury he had
suffered.  Alas, said he, the frogs and the dogs have taken from me
what is mine, and the butcher has paid me for it with the stick.  And
he related at full length what had happened.  Thereupon the king's
daughter began to laugh heartily, and the king said to him, I cannot
give you justice in this, but you shall have my daughter to wife for
it - in her whole life she has never yet laughed as she has just done
at you, and I have promised her to him who could make her laugh.  You
may thank God for your good fortune. Oh, answered the peasant, I do
not want her at all.  I have a wife already, and she is one too many
for me, when I go home, it is just as if I had a wife standing in
every corner.  Then the king grew angry, and said, you are a boor.
Ah, lord king, replied the peasant, what can you expect from an ox,
but beef.  Stop, answered the king, you shall have another reward.
Be off now, but come back in three days, and then you shall have five
hundred counted out in full. When the peasant went out by the gate,
the sentry said, you have made the king's daughter laugh, so you will
certainly receive something good.  Yes, that is what I think,
answered the peasant, five hundred are to be counted out to me.
Listen, said the soldier, give me some of it.  What can you do with
all that money.  As it is you, said the peasant, you shall have two
hundred,  present yourself in three days, time before the king, and
let it be paid to you.  A Jew, who was standing by and had heard the
conversation, ran after the peasant, held him by the coat, and said,
oh, wonder of God, what a child of fortune you are. I will change it
for you, I will change it for you into small coins, what do you want
with the great talers.  Jew, said the countryman, three hundred can
you still have, give it to me at once in coin, in three days from
this, you will be paid for it by the king.  The Jew was delighted
with the small profit, and brought the sum in bad groschen, three of
which were worth two good ones. After three days had passed,
according to the king's command, the peasant went before the king.
Pull his coat off, said the latter, and he shall have his five
hundred.  Ah, said the peasant, they no longer belong to me, I
presented two hundred of them to the sentry, and three hundred the
Jew has changed for me, so by right nothing at all belongs to me.  In
the meantime the soldier and the Jew entered and claimed what they
had gained from the peasant, and they received the blows strictly
counted out.  The soldier bore it patiently and knew already how it
tasted, but the Jew said sorrowfully, alas, alas, are these the heavy
talers.  The king could not help laughing at the peasant, and when
all his anger was spent, he said, as you have already lost your
reward before it fell to your lot, I will give you compensation.  Go
into my treasure chamber and get some money for yourself, as much as
you will.  The peasant did not need to be told twice, and stuffed
into his big pockets whatsoever would go in.  Afterwards he went to
an inn and counted out his money. The Jew had crept after him and
heard how he muttered to himself, that rogue of a king has cheated me
after all, why could he not have given me the money himself, and then
I should have known what I had.  How can I tell now if what I have
had the luck to put in my pockets is right or not.  Good heavens,
said the Jew to himself, that man is speaking disrespectfully of our
lord the king, I will run and inform, and then I shall get a reward,
and he will be punished as well. When the king heard of the peasant's
words he fell into a passion, and commanded the Jew to go and bring
the offender to him.  The Jew ran to the peasant, you are to go at
once to the lord king in the very clothes you have on.  I know what's
right better than that, answered the peasant, I shall have a new coat
made first. Do you think that a man with so much money in his pocket
should go there in his ragged old coat.  The Jew, as he saw that the
peasant would not stir without another coat, and as he feared that if
the king's anger cooled, he himself would lose his reward, and the
peasant his punishment, said, I will out of pure friendship lend you
a coat for the short time.  What people will not do for love.  The
peasant was contented with this, put the Jew's coat on, and went off
with him. The king reproached the countryman because of the evil
speaking of which the Jew had informed him.  Ah, said the peasant,
what a Jew says is always false - no true word ever comes out of his
mouth.  That rascal there is capable of maintaining that I have his
coat on. What is that, shrieked the Jew, is the coat not mine.  Have
I not lent it to you out of pure friendship, in order that you might
appear before the lord king.  When the king heard that, he said, the
Jew has assuredly deceived one or the other of us, either myself or
the peasant.  And again he ordered something to be counted out to him
in hard thalers.  The peasant, however, went home in the good coat,
with the good money in his pocket, and said to himself, this time I
have made it.
There were once upon a time a king and a queen who lived
happily together and had twelve children, but they were
all boys.  Then said the king to his wife, if the thirteenth
child which you are about to bring into the world, is a girl, the
twelve boys shall die, in order that her possessions may be great,
and that the kingdom may fall to her alone.  He even caused twelve
coffins to be made, which were already filled with shavings, and
in each lay a little death pillow, and he had them taken into a
locked-up room, and then he gave the queen the key of it, and bade
her not to speak of this to anyone.

The mother, however, now sat and lamented all day long, until
the youngest son, who was always with her, and whom she had
named benjamin, from the bible, said to her, dear mother, why
are you so sad.

Dearest child, she answered, I may not tell you.  But he let
her have no rest until she went and unlocked the room, and showed
him the twelve coffins ready filled with shavings.  Then she said,
my dearest benjamin, your father has had these coffins made for
you and for your eleven brothers, for if I bring a little girl into
the world, you are all to be killed and buried in them.  And as she
wept while she was saying this, the son comforted her and said, weep
not, dear mother, we will save ourselves, and go hence.  But she
said, go forth into the forest with your eleven brothers, and let
one sit constantly on the highest tree which can be found, and keep
watch, looking towards the tower here in the castle.  If I give
birth to a little son, I will put up a white flag, and then you may
venture to come back.  But if I bear a daughter, I will hoist a red
flag, and then fly hence as quickly as you are able, and may the
good God protect you.  And every night I will rise up and pray for
you - in winter that you may be able to warm yourself at a fire, and
in summer that you may not faint away in the heat.

After she had blessed her sons therefore, they went forth into
the forest.  They each kept watch in turn, and sat on the highest
oak and looked towards the tower.  When eleven days had passed
and the turn came to benjamin, he saw that a flag was being raised.
It was, however, not the white, but the blood-red flag which
announced that they were all to die.  When the brothers heard that,
they were very angry and said, are we all to suffer death for the
sake of a girl.  We swear that we will avenge ourselves -
wheresoever we find a girl, her red blood shall flow.

Thereupon they went deeper into the forest, and in the midst
of it, where it was the darkest, they found a little bewitched hut,
which was standing empty.  Then said they, here we will dwell,
and you benjamin, who are the youngest and weakest, you shall
stay at home and keep house, we others will go out and fetch food.

Then they went into the forest and shot hares, wild deer, birds and
pigeons, and whatsoever there was to eat.  This they took to
benjamin, who had to dress it for them in order that they might
appease their hunger.  They lived together ten years in the little
hut, and the time did not appear long to them.

The little daughter which their mother the queen had given
birth to, was now grown up.  She was good of heart, and fair of
face, and had a golden star on her forehead.  Once, on a great
washing, she saw twelve men's shirts among the things, and asked her
mother, to whom do these twelve shirts belong, for they are far
too small for father.  Then the queen answered with a heavy
heart, dear child, these belong to your twelve brothers.  Said the
maiden, where are my twelve brothers, I have never yet heard
of them.  She replied, God knows where they are, they are
wandering about the world.  Then she took the maiden and opened
the chamber for her, and showed her the twelve coffins with the
shavings, and the death pillows.  These coffins, said she,
were destined for your brothers, who went away secretly before you
were born, and she related to her how everything had happened.
Then said the maiden, dear mother, weep not, I will go and seek
my brothers.

So she took the twelve shirts and went forth, and straight into
the great forest.  She walked the whole day, and in the evening she
came to the bewitched hut.  Then she entered it and found a young
boy, who asked, from whence do you come, and whither are you
bound, and was astonished that she was so beautiful, and wore
royal garments, and had a star on her forehead.  And she answered,
I am a king's daughter, and am seeking my twelve brothers, and
I will walk as far as the sky is blue until I find them.  And she
showed him the twelve shirts which belonged to them.  Then
benjamin saw that she was his sister, and said, I am benjamin, your
youngest brother.  And she began to weep for joy, and benjamin
wept also, and they kissed and embraced each other with the
greatest love.  But after this he said, dear sister, there is still
one difficulty.  We have agreed that every maiden whom we meet
shall die, because we have been obliged to leave our kingdom on
account of a girl.  Then said she, I will willingly die, if by so
doing I can save my twelve brothers.

No, answered he, you shall not die.  Seat yourself beneath this
tub until our eleven brothers come, and then I will soon come to
an agreement with them.

She did so, and when it was night the others came from hunting,
and their dinner was ready.  And as they were sitting at table, and
eating, they asked, what news is there.  Said benjamin, don't
you know anything.  No, they answered.  He continued, you have
been in the forest and I have stayed at home, and yet I know
more than you do.  Tell us then, they cried.  He answered, but
promise me that the first maiden who meets us shall not be killed.

Yes, they all cried, she shall have mercy, only do tell us.
Then said he, our sister is here, and he lifted up the tub, and
the king's daughter came forth in her royal garments with the
golden star on her forehead, and she was beautiful, delicate and
fair.  Then they were all rejoiced, and fell on her neck, and kissed
and loved her with all their hearts.

Now she stayed at home with benjamin and helped him with
the work.  The eleven went into the forest and caught game, and
deer, and birds, and wood-pigeons that they might have food, and
the little sister and benjamin took care to make it ready for them.
She sought for the wood for cooking and herbs for vegetables, and
put the pans on the fire so that the dinner was always ready when
the eleven came.  She likewise kept order in the little house, and
put beautifully white clean coverings on the little beds and the
brothers were always contented and lived in great harmony with her.

Once upon a time the two at home had prepared a wonderful
feast, and when they were all together, they sat down and ate and
drank and were full of gladness.  There was, however, a little
garden belonging to the bewitched house wherein stood twelve lily
flowers, which are likewise called student-lilies.  She wished to
give her brothers pleasure, and plucked the twelve flowers, and
thought she would present each brother with one while at dinner.
But at the self-same moment that she plucked the flowers the twelve
brothers were changed into twelve ravens, and flew away over the
forest, and the house and garden vanished likewise.  And now the
poor maiden was alone in the wild forest, and when she looked
around, an old woman was standing near her who said, my child,
what have you done.  Why did you not leave the twelve white
flowers growing.  They were your brothers, who are now forevermore
changed into ravens.  The maiden said, weeping, is there no way of
saving them.

No, said the woman, there is but one in the whole world, and
that is so hard that you will not save them by it, for you must be
dumb for seven years, and may not speak or laugh, and if you speak
one single word, and only an hour of the seven years is wanting, all
is in vain, and your brothers will be killed by the one word.

Then said the maiden in her heart, I know with certainty that
I shall set my brothers free, and went and sought a high tree and
seated herself in it and spun, and neither spoke nor laughed.  Now
it so happened that a king was hunting in the forest, who had a
great greyhound which ran to the tree on which the maiden was
sitting, and sprang about it, whining, and barking at her.  Then
the king came by and saw the beautiful king's daughter with the
golden star on her brow, and was so charmed with her beauty that
he called to ask her if she would be his wife.  She made no answer,
but nodded a little with her head.  So he climbed up the tree
himself, carried her down, placed her on his horse, and bore her
home.  Then the wedding was solemnized with great magnificence and
rejoicing, but the bride neither spoke nor smiled.  When they had
lived happily together for a few years, the king's mother, who was
a wicked woman, began to slander the young queen, and said to
the king, this is a common beggar girl whom you have brought
back with you.  Who knows what wicked tricks she practises secretly.
Even if she be dumb, and not able to speak, she still might
laugh for once.  But those who do not laugh have bad consciences.

At first the king would not believe it, but the old woman urged this
so long, and accused her of so many evil things, that at last the
king let himself be persuaded and sentenced her to death.
And now a great fire was lighted in the courtyard in which she
was to be burnt, and the king stood above at the window and
looked on with tearful eyes, because he still loved her so much.
And when she was bound fast to the stake, and the fire was licking
at her clothes with its red tongue, the last instant of the seven
years expired.  Then a whirring sound was heard in the air, and
twelve ravens came flying towards the place, and sank downwards, and
when they touched the earth they were her twelve brothers, whom
she had saved.  They tore the fire asunder, extinguished the flames,
set their dear sister free, and kissed and embraced her.  And now
as she dared to open her mouth and speak, she told the king why she
had been dumb, and had never laughed.  The king rejoiced when
he heard that she was innocent, and they all lived in great unity
until their death.  The wicked step-mother was taken before the
judge, and put into a barrel filled with boiling oil and venomous
snakes, and died an evil death.
Little brother took his little sister by the hand and said, since
our mother died we have had no happiness.  Our step-mother
beats us every day, and if we come near her she kicks us away
with her foot.  Our meals are the hard crusts of bread that are left
over.  And the little dog under the table is better off, for she
often throws it a choice morsel.  God pity us, if our mother only
knew.  Come, we will go forth together into the wide world.

They walked the whole day over meadows, fields, and stony
places.  And when it rained the little sister said, heaven and our
hearts are weeping together.  In the evening they came to a large
forest, and they were so weary with sorrow and hunger and the
long walk, that they lay down in a hollow tree and fell asleep.
The next day when they awoke, the sun was already high in the
sky, and shone down hot into the tree.  Then the brother said,
sister, I am thirsty.  If I knew of a little brook I would go and
just take a drink.  I think I hear one running.  The brother got up
and took the little sister by the hand, and they set off to find
the brook.  But the wicked step-mother was a witch, and had seen how
the two children had gone away, and had crept after them secretly,
as witches creep, and had bewitched all the brooks in the forest.

Now when they found a little brook leaping brightly over the
stones, the brother was going to drink out of it, but the sister
heard how it said as it ran, who drinks of me will be a tiger.
Who drinks of me will be a tiger.  Then the sister cried, pray,
dear brother, do not drink, or you will become a wild beast, and
tear me to pieces.  The brother did not drink, although he was so
thirsty, but said, I will wait for the next spring.

When they came to the next brook the sister heard this also say,
who drinks of me will be a wolf.  Who drinks of me will be a wolf.
Then the sister cried out, pray, dear brother, do not drink,
or you will become a wolf, and devour me.  The brother did not
drink, and said, I will wait until we come to the next spring, but
then I must drink, say what you like.  For my thirst is too great.
And when they came to the third brook the sister heard how it
said as it ran, who drinks of me will be a roebuck.  Who drinks
of me will be a roebuck.  The sister said, oh, I pray you, dear
brother, do not drink, or you will become a roebuck, and run away
from me.  But the brother had knelt down at once by the brook,
and had bent down and drunk some of the water, and as soon as
the first drops touched his lips he lay there in the form of a
young roebuck.

And now the sister wept over her poor bewitched brother, and
the little roe wept also, and sat sorrowfully near to her.  But at
last the girl said, be quiet, dear little roe, I will never,
never leave you.

Then she untied her golden garter and put it round the roebuck's
neck, and she plucked rushes and wove them into a soft cord.  This
she tied to the little animal and led it on, and she walked deeper
and deeper into the forest.

And when they had gone a very long way they came at last to a
little house, and the girl looked in.  And as it was empty, she
thought, we can stay here and live.  Then she sought for leaves
and moss to make a soft bed for the roe.  And every morning she
went out and gathered roots and berries and nuts for herself, and
brought tender grass for the roe, who ate out of her hand, and was
content and played round about her.  In the evening, when the sister
was tired, and had said her prayer, she laid her head upon the
roebuck's back - that was her pillow, and she slept softly on it.
And if only the brother had had his human form it would have been a
delightful life.
For some time they were alone like this in the wilderness.  But
it happened that the king of the country held a great hunt in the
forest.  Then the blasts of the horns, the barking of dogs and the
merry shouts of the huntsmen rang through the trees, and the roebuck
heard all, and was only too anxious to be there.  Oh, said he,
to his sister, let me be off to the hunt, I cannot bear it any
longer, and he begged so much that at last she agreed.  But, said
she to him, come back to me in the evening.  I must shut my door for
fear of the rough huntsmen, so knock and say, my little sister,
let me in, that I may know you.  And if you do not say that, I
shall not open the door.  Then the young roebuck sprang away.  So
happy was he and so merry in the open air.
The king and the huntsmen saw the lovely animal, and started
after him, but they could not catch him, and when they thought
that they surely had him, away he sprang through the bushes and
vanished.  When it was dark he ran to the cottage, knocked, and
said, my little sister, let me in.  Then the door was opened for
him, and he jumped in, and rested himself the whole night through
upon his soft bed.
The next day the hunt began again, and when the roebuck once
more heard the bugle-horn, and the ho. Ho. Of the huntsmen, he
had no peace, but said, sister, let me out, I must be off.  His
sister opened the door for him, and said, but you must be here again
in the evening and say your pass-word.
When the king and his huntsmen again saw the young roebuck
with the golden collar, they all chased him, but he was too quick
and nimble for them.  This lasted the whole day, but by the evening
the huntsmen had surrounded him, and one of them wounded him
a little in the foot, so that he limped and ran slowly.  Then a
hunter crept after him to the cottage and heard how he said, my
little sister, let me in, and saw that the door was opened for him,
and was shut again at once.  The huntsman took notice of it all, and
went to the king and told him what he had seen and heard.  Then
the king said, to-morrow we will hunt once more.
The little sister, however, was dreadfully frightened when she
saw that her fawn was hurt.  She washed the blood off him, laid
herbs on the wound, and said, go to your bed, dear roe, that you
may get well again.  But the wound was so slight that the roebuck,
next morning, did not feel it any more.  And when he again heard
the sport outside, he said, I cannot bear it, I must be there.
They shall not find it so easy to catch me.  The sister cried, and
said, this time they will kill you, and here am I alone in the
forest and forsaken by all the world.  I will not let you out.  Then
you will have me die of grief, answered the roe.  When I hear the
bugle-horns I feel as if I must jump out of my skin.  Then the
sister could not do otherwise, but opened the door for him with a
heavy heart, and the roebuck, full of health and joy, bounded into
the forest.
When the king saw him, he said to his huntsmen, now chase
him all day long till night-fall, but take care that no one does him
any harm.
As soon as the sun had set, the king said to the huntsman, now
come and show me the cottage in the wood.  And when he was at
the door, he knocked and called out, dear little sister, let me in.
Then the door opened, and the king walked in, and there stood
a maiden more lovely than any he had ever seen.  The maiden was
frightened when she saw, not her little roe, but a man come in who
wore a golden crown upon his head.  But the king looked kindly
at her, stretched out his hand, and said, will you go with me to
my palace and be my dear wife.  Yes, indeed, answered the
maiden, but the little roe must go with me, I cannot leave him.
The king said, it shall stay with you as long as you live, and
shall want nothing.  Just then he came running in, and the sister
again tied him with the cord of rushes, took it in her own hand, and
went away with the king from the cottage.
The king took the lovely maiden upon his horse and carried
her to his palace, where the wedding was held with great pomp.
She was now the queen, and they lived for a long time happily
together.  The roebuck was tended and cherished, and ran about in
the palace-garden.
 But the wicked step-mother, because of whom the children had
gone out into the world, had never thought but that the sister had
been torn to pieces by the wild beasts in the wood, and that the
brother had been shot for a roebuck by the huntsmen.  Now when
she heard that they were so happy, and so well off, envy and
jealousy rose in her heart and left her no peace, and she thought of
nothing but how she could bring them again to misfortune.  Her own
daughter, who was ugly as night, and had only one eye, reproached
her and said, a queen.  That ought to have been my luck.  Just be
quiet, answered the old woman, and comforted her by saying,
when the time comes I shall be ready.
As time went on the queen had a pretty little boy, and it
happened that the king was out hunting.  So the old witch took the
form of the chamber maid, went into the room where the queen
lay, and said to her, come the bath is ready.  It will do you good,
and give you fresh strength.  Make haste before it gets cold.
Her daughter also was close by.  So they carried the weakly
queen into the bath-room, and put her into the bath.  Then they
shut the door and ran away.  But in the bath-room they had made
a fire of such hellish heat that the beautiful young queen was soon
suffocated.
When this was done the old woman took her daughter, put a
nightcap on her head, and laid her in bed in place of the queen.
She gave her too the shape and look of the queen, only she
could not make good the lost eye.  But in order that the king might
not see it, she was to lie on the side on which she had no eye.
In the evening when he came home and heard that he had a son
he was heartily glad, and was going to the bed of his dear wife to
see how she was.  But the old woman quickly called out, for your
life leave the curtains closed.  The queen ought not to see the
light yet, and must have rest.  The king went away, and did not find
out that a false queen was lying in the bed.
But at midnight, when all slept, the nurse, who was sitting in the
nursery by the cradle, and who was the only person awake, saw
the door open and the true queen walk in.  She took the child out
of the cradle, laid it on her arm, and suckled it.  Then she shook
up its pillow, laid the child down again, and covered it with the
little quilt.  And she did not forget the roebuck, but went into the
corner where it lay, and stroked its back.  Then she went quite
silently out of the door again.  The next morning the nurse asked
the guards whether anyone had come into the palace during the night,
but they answered, no, we have seen no one.
She came thus many nights and never spoke a word.  The nurse
always saw her, but she did not dare to tell anyone about it.
When some time had passed in this manner, the queen began to
speak in the night, and said,
     how fares my child, how fares my roe.
     Twice shall I come, then never more.
The nurse did not answer, but when the queen had gone again,
went to the king and told him all.   The king said, ah, God.
What is this.  To-morrow night I will watch by the child.  In the
evening he went into the nursery, and at midnight the queen again
appeared and said,
     how fares my child, how fares my roe.
     Once will I come, then never more.
And she nursed the child as she was wont to do before she
disappeared.  The king dared not speak to her, but on the next
night he watched again.  Then she said,
     how fares my child, how fares my roe.
     This time I come, then never more.
Then the king could not restrain himself.  He sprang towards her,
and said, you can be none other than my dear wife.  She answered,
yes, I am your dear wife, and at the same moment she received
life again, and by God's grace became fresh, rosy and full of
health.
Then she told the king the evil deed which the wicked witch
and her daughter had been guilty of towards her.  The king ordered
both to be led before the judge, and the judgment was delivered
against them.  The daughter was taken into the forest where she was
torn to pieces by wild beasts, but the witch was cast into the fire
and miserably burnt.  And as soon as she was burnt to ashes, the
roebuck changed his shape, and received his human form again, so the
sister and brother lived happily together all their lives.
There were once a man and a woman who had long in vain
wished for a child.  At length the woman hoped that God
was about to grant her desire.  These people had a little
window at the back of their house from which a splendid garden
could be seen, which was full of the most beautiful flowers and
herbs.  It was, however, surrounded by a high wall, and no one
dared to go into it because it belonged to an enchantress, who had
great power and was dreaded by all the world.  One day the woman
was standing by this window and looking down into the garden,
when she saw a bed which was planted with the most beautiful
rampion - rapunzel, and it looked so fresh and green that she
longed for it, and had the greatest desire to eat some.  This desire
increased every day, and as she knew that she could not get any
of it, she quite pined away, and began to look pale and miserable.
Then her husband was alarmed, and asked, what ails you, dear
wife.  Ah, she replied, if I can't eat some of the rampion, which
is in the garden behind our house, I shall die.  The man, who loved
her, thought, sooner than let your wife die, bring her some of
the rampion yourself, let it cost what it will.  At twilight, he
clambered down over the wall into the garden of the enchantress,
hastily clutched a handful of rampion, and took it to his wife.  She
at once made herself a salad of it, and ate it greedily.  It tasted
so good to her - so very good, that the next day she longed for it
three times as much as before.  If he was to have any rest, her
husband must once more descend into the garden.  In the gloom of
evening, therefore, he let himself down again.  But when he had
clambered down the wall he was terribly afraid, for he saw the
enchantress standing before him.  How can you dare, said she with
angry look, descend into my garden and steal my rampion like a
thief.  You shall suffer for it.  Ah, answered he, let mercy take
the place of justice, I only made up my mind to do it out of
necessity.  My wife saw your rampion from the window, and felt such
a longing for it that she would have died if she had not got some
to eat.  Then the enchantress allowed her anger to be softened, and
said to him, if the case be as you say, I will allow you to take
away with you as much rampion as you will, only I make one
condition, you must give me the child which your wife will bring
into the world.  It shall be well treated, and I will care for it
like a mother.  The man in his terror consented to everything, and
when the woman was brought to bed, the enchantress appeared at once,
gave the child the name of rapunzel, and took it away with her.
Rapunzel grew into the most beautiful child under the sun.
When she was twelve years old, the enchantress shut her into a
tower, which lay in a forest, and had neither stairs nor door, but
quite at the top was a little window.  When the enchantress
wanted to go in, she placed herself beneath it and cried,
     rapunzel, rapunzel,
     let down your hair to me.
Rapunzel had magnificent long hair, fine as spun gold, and when
she heard the voice of the enchantress she unfastened her braided
tresses, wound them round one of the hooks of the window above,
and then the hair fell twenty ells down, and the enchantress climbed
up by it.
After a year or two, it came to pass that the king's son rode
through the forest and passed by the tower.  Then he heard a song,
which was so charming that he stood still and listened.  This was
rapunzel, who in her solitude passed her time in letting her sweet
voice resound.  The king's son wanted to climb up to her, and
looked for the door of the tower, but none was to be found.  He
rode home, but the singing had so deeply touched his heart, that
every day he went out into the forest and listened to it.  Once when
he was thus standing behind a tree, he saw that an enchantress
came there, and he heard how she cried,
     rapunzel, rapunzel,
     let down your hair.
Then rapunzel let down the braids of her hair, and the
enchantress climbed up to her.  If that is the ladder by which one
mounts, I too will try my fortune, said he, and the next day when
it began to grow dark, he went to the tower and cried,
     rapunzel, rapunzel,
     let down your hair.
Immediately the hair fell down and the king's son climbed up.
At first rapunzel was terribly frightened when a man, such as
her eyes had never yet beheld, came to her.  But the king's son
began to talk to her quite like a friend, and told her that his
heart had been so stirred that it had let him have no rest, and he
had been forced to see her.  Then rapunzel lost her fear, and when
he asked her if she would take him for her husband, and she saw that
he was young and handsome, she thought, he will love me more than
old dame gothel does.  And she said yes, and laid her hand in his.
She said, I will willingly go away with you, but I do not know
how to get down.  Bring with you a skein of silk every time that
you come, and I will weave a ladder with it, and when that is ready
I will descend, and you will take me on your horse.  They agreed
that until that time he should come to her every evening, for the
old woman came by day.  The enchantress remarked nothing of
this, until once rapunzel said to her, tell me, dame gothel, how
it happens that you are so much heavier for me to draw up than
the young king's son - he is with me in a moment.  Ah. You
wicked child, cried the enchantress.  What do I hear you say.  I
thought I had separated you from all the world, and yet you have
deceived me.  In her anger she clutched rapunzel's beautiful
tresses, wrapped them twice round her left hand, seized a pair of
scissors with the right, and snip, snap, they were cut off, and the
lovely braids lay on the ground.  And she was so pitiless that she
took poor rapunzel into a desert where she had to live in great
grief and misery.
On the same day that she cast out rapunzel, however, the
enchantress fastened the braids of hair, which she had cut off, to
the hook of the window, and when the king's son came and cried,
     rapunzel, rapunzel,
     let down your hair,
she let the hair down.  The king's son ascended, but instead of
finding his dearest rapunzel, he found the enchantress, who gazed
at him with wicked and venomous looks.  Aha, she cried mockingly,
you would fetch your dearest, but the beautiful bird sits
no longer singing in the nest.  The cat has got it, and will scratch
out your eyes as well.  Rapunzel is lost to you.  You will never see
her again.  The king's son was beside himself with pain, and in
his despair he leapt down from the tower.  He escaped with his life,
but the thorns into which he fell pierced his eyes.  Then he
wandered quite blind about the forest, ate nothing but roots and
berries, and did naught but lament and weep over the loss of his
dearest wife.  Thus he roamed about in misery for some years, and at
length came to the desert where rapunzel, with the twins to which
she had given birth, a boy and a girl, lived in wretchedness.  He
heard a voice, and it seemed so familiar to him that he went towards
it, and when he approached, rapunzel knew him and fell on his neck
and wept.  Two of her tears wetted his eyes and they grew clear
again, and he could see with them as before.  He led her to his
kingdom where he was joyfully received, and they lived for a long
time afterwards, happy and contented.
There was once a man whose wife died, and a woman whose husband
died, and the man had a daughter, and the woman also had a
daughter.  The girls were acquainted with each other, and went
out walking together, and afterwards came to the woman in her
house.  Then said she to the man's daughter, listen, tell your
father that I would like to marry him, and then you shall
wash yourself in milk every morning, and drink wine, but my own
daughter shall wash herself in water and drink water.  The girl
went home, and told her father what the woman had said.  The
man said, what shall I do.  Marriage is a joy and also a torment.
At length as he could come to no decision, he pulled off his boot,
and said, take this boot, it has a hole in the sole of it.  Go with
it up to the loft, hang it on the big nail, and then pour water into
it.  If it hold the water, then I will again take a wife, but if it
run through, I will not.  The girl did as she was bid, but the water
drew the hole together and the boot became full to the top.  She
informed her father how it had turned out.  Then he himself went up,
and when he saw that she was right, he went to the widow and wooed
her, and the wedding was celebrated.
The next morning, when the two girls got up, there stood before
the man's daughter milk for her to wash in and wine for her to
drink, but before the woman's daughter stood water to wash
herself with and water for drinking.  On the second morning, stood
water for washing and water for drinking before the man's
daughter as well as before the woman's daughter.  And on the third
morning stood water for washing and water for drinking before the
man's daughter, and milk for washing and wine for drinking, before
the woman's daughter, and so it continued.  The woman became her
step-daughter's bitterest enemy, and day by day did her best to
treat her still worse.  She was also envious because her
step-daughter was beautiful and lovable, and her own daughter ugly
and repulsive.
Once, in winter, when everything was frozen as hard as a stone,
and hill and vale lay covered with snow, the woman made a frock
of paper, called her step-daughter, and said, here, put on this
dress and go out into the wood, and fetch me a little basketful of
strawberries - I have a fancy for some.  Good heavens, said the
girl, no strawberries grow in winter.  The ground is frozen, and
besides the snow has covered everything.  And why am I to go in
this paper frock.  It is so cold outside that one's very breath
freezes.  The wind will blow through the frock, and the thorns
tear it off my body.  Will you contradict me,  said the step-mother.
See that you go, and do not show your face again until you have
the basketful of strawberries.  Then she gave her a little piece of
hard bread, and said, this will last you the day, and thought,
you will die of cold and hunger outside, and will never be seen
again by me.
Then the maiden was obedient, and put on the paper frock, and
went out with the basket.  Far and wide there was nothing but snow,
and not a green blade to be seen.  When she got into the wood she
saw a small house out of which peeped three little men.  She wished
them good day, and knocked modestly at the door.  They cried,
come in, and she entered the room and seated herself on the bench by
the stove, where she began to warm herself and eat her breakfast.
The little men said, give us some of it, too.  Willingly,
she said, and divided her piece of bread in two 'and gave
them the half.  They asked, what do you here in the forest in the
winter time, in your thin dress.  Ah, she answered, I am to look
for a basketful of strawberries, and am not to go home until I can
take them with me.  When she had eaten her bread, they gave her
a broom and said, sweep away the snow at the back door.  But
when she was outside, the three little men said to each other, what
shall we give her as she is so good, and has shared her bread with
us.  Then said the first, my gift is, that she shall every day grow
more beautiful.  The second said, my gift is, that gold pieces shall
fall out of her mouth every time she speaks.  The third said, my
gift is, that a king shall come and take her to wife.
The girl, however, did as the little men had bidden
her, swept away the snow behind the little house with
the broom, and what did she find but real ripe strawberries,
which came up quite dark-red out of the snow.  In her
joy she hastily gathered her basket full, thanked the
little men, shook hands with each of them, and ran
home to take her step-mother what she had longed for so much.
When she went in and said good-evening, a piece of gold at once
fell out of her mouth.  Thereupon she related what had happened
to her in the wood, but with every word she spoke, gold pieces fell
from her mouth, until very soon the whole room was covered with
them.  Now look at her arrogance, cried the step-sister, to throw
about gold in that way.  But she was secretly envious of it, and
wanted to go into the forest also to seek strawberries.  The mother
said, no, my dear little daughter, it is too cold, you might freeze
to death.  However, as her daughter let her have no peace, the
mother at last yielded, made her a magnificent coat of fur, which
she was obliged to put on, and gave her bread-and-butter and cake
for her journey.
The girl went into the forest and straight up to the little house.
The three little men peeped out again, but she did not greet them,
and without looking round at them and without speaking to them,
she went awkwardly into the room, seated herself by the stove, and
began to eat her bread-and-butter and cake.  Give us some of it,
cried the little men.  But she replied, there is not enough for
myself, so how can I give it away to other people.  When she had
finished eating, they said, there is a broom for you, sweep it all
clean in front of the back-door.  Sweep for yourselves, she
answered, I am not your servant.  When she saw that they were
not going to give her anything, she went out by the door.  Then the
little men said to each other, what shall we give her as she is so
naughty, and has a wicked envious heart, that will never let her do
a good turn to any one.  The first said, I grant that she may grow
uglier every day.  The second said, I grant that at every word she
says, a toad shall spring out of her mouth.  The third said, I grant
that she may die a miserable death.  The maiden looked for
strawberries outside, but as she found none, she went angrily home.
And when she opened her mouth, and was about to tell her mother what
had happened to her in the wood, with every word she said, a toad
sprang out of her mouth, so that everyone was seized with horror
of her.
Then the step-mother was still more enraged, and thought of
nothing but how to do every possible injury to the man's daughter,
whose beauty, however, grew daily greater.  At length she took a
cauldron, set it on the fire, and boiled yarn in it.  When it was
boiled, she flung it on the poor girl's shoulder, and gave her an
axe in order that she might go on the frozen river, cut a hole in
the ice, and rinse the yarn.  She was obedient, went thither and cut
a hole in the ice.  And while she was in the midst of her cutting, a
splendid carriage came driving up, in which sat the king.  The
carriage stopped, and the king asked, my child, who are you, and
what are you doing here.  I am a poor girl, and I am rinsing yarn.
Then the king felt compassion, and when he saw that she was so very
beautiful, he said to her, will you go away with me.  Ah, yes, with
all my heart, she answered, for she was glad to get away from the
mother and sister.
So she got into the carriage and drove away with the king, and
when they arrived at his palace, the wedding was celebrated with
great pomp, as the little men had granted to the maiden.  When a
year was over, the young queen bore a son, and as the step-mother
had heard of her great good-fortune, she came with her daughter
to the palace and pretended that she wanted to pay her a visit.
But, when the king had gone out, and no one else was present, the
wicked woman seized the queen by the head, and her daughter
seized her by the feet, and they lifted her out of the bed, and
threw her out of the window into the stream which flowed by.  Then
the ugly daughter laid herself in the bed, and the old woman
covered her up over her head.  When the king came home again and
wanted to speak to his wife, the old woman cried, hush, hush, that
can't be now, she is lying in a violent sweat.  You must let her
rest to-day.  The king suspected no evil, and did not come back
again till next morning.  And as he talked with his wife and she
answered him, with every word a toad leaped out, whereas formerly a
piece of gold had fallen.  Then he asked what that could be, but the
old woman said that she had got that from the violent sweat, and
would soon lose it again.  During the night, however, the scullion
saw a duck come swimming up the gutter, and it said -
     king, what art thou doing now.
     Sleepest thou, or wakest thou.
And as he returned no answer, it said -
     and my guests, what may they do.
The scullion said -
     they are sleeping soundly, too.
Then it asked again -
     what does little baby mine.
He answered -
     sleepeth in her cradle fine.
Then she went upstairs in the form of the queen, nursed the
baby, shook up its little bed, covered it over, and then swam away
again down the gutter in the shape of a duck.  She came thus for
two nights.  On the third, she said to the scullion, go and tell the
king to take his sword and swing it three times over me on the
threshold.  Then the scullion ran and told this to the king, who
came with his sword and swung it thrice over the spirit, and at the
third time, his wife stood before him strong, living, and healthy
as she had been before.  Thereupon the king was full of great joy,
but he kept the queen hidden in a chamber until the sunday, when
the baby was to be christened.  And when it was christened he said,
what does a person deserve who drags another out of bed and
throws him in the water.  The wretch deserves nothing better,
answered the old woman, than to be taken and put in a barrel
stuck full of nails, and rolled down hill into the water.  Then,
said the king, you have pronounced your own sentence.  And he
ordered such a barrel to be brought, and the old woman to be put
into it with her daughter, and then the top was hammered on, and
the barrel rolled down hill until it went into the river.
There was once a girl who was idle and would not spin, and
let her mother say what she would, she could not bring her
to it.  At last the mother was once so overcome with anger
and impatience, that she beat her, at which the girl began
to weep loudly.  Now at this very moment the queen drove by,
and when she heard the weeping she stopped her carriage, went
into the house and asked the mother why she was beating her
daughter so that the cries could be heard out on the road.  Then
the woman was ashamed to reveal the laziness of her daughter
and said, I cannot get her to leave off spinning.  She insists
on spinning for ever and ever, and I am poor, and cannot
procure the flax.  Then
answered the queen, there is nothing that I like better to hear
than spinning, and I am never happier than when the wheels are
humming.  Let me have your daughter with me in the palace.  I
have flax enough, and there she shall spin as much as she likes.
The mother was heartily satisfied with this, and the queen
took the girl with her.  When they had arrived at the palace,
she led her up into three rooms which were filled from the
bottom to the top with the finest flax.  Now spin me this flax,
said she, and when you have done it, you shall have my eldest
son for a husband, even if you are poor.  I care not for that,
your untiring industry is dowry enough.  The girl was secretly
terrified, for she could not have spun the flax, no, not if
she had lived till she was three hundred years old, and had
sat at it every day from morning till night.  When therefore she
was alone, she began to weep, and sat thus for three days
without moving a finger.  On the third day came the queen, and
when she saw that nothing had yet been spun, she was surprised,
but the girl excused herself by saying that she had not been able
to begin because of her great distress at leaving her mother's
house.  The queen was satisfied with this, but said when she was
going away, tomorrow you must begin to work.
When the girl was alone again, she did not know what to do, and
in her distress went to the window.  Then she saw three women
coming towards her, the first of whom had a broad flat foot, the
second had such a great underlip that it hung down over her chin,
and the third had a broad thumb.  They remained standing before
the window, looked up, and asked the girl what was amiss with
her.  She complained of her trouble, and then they offered
her their help and said, if you will invite us to the wedding,
not be ashamed of us, and will call us your aunts, and likewise
will place us at your table, we will spin up the flax for you,
and that in a very short time.  With all my heart, she replied,
do but come in and begin the work at once.  Then she let in the
three strange women, and cleared a place in the first room,
where they seated themselves and began their spinning.  The one
drew the thread and trod the wheel, the other wetted the thread,
the third twisted it, and struck the table
with her finger, and as often as she struck it, a skein of
thread fell to the ground that was spun in the finest manner
possible.  The girl concealed the three spinners from the queen,
and showed her whenever she came the great quantity of spun
thread, until the latter could not praise her enough.  When
the first room was empty she went to the second, and at last to
the third, and that too was quickly cleared.  Then the three women
took leave and said to the girl, do not forget what you have
promised us - it will make your fortune.
When the maiden showed the queen the empty rooms, and the great
heap of yarn, she gave orders for the wedding, and the bridegroom
rejoiced that he was to have such a clever and industrious wife,
and praised her mightily.  I have three aunts, said the girl,
and as they have been very kind to me, I should not like to
forget them in my good fortune, allow me to invite them to the
wedding, and let them sit with us at table.  The queen and the
bridegroom said, why should we not allow that.  Therefore when
the feast began, the three women entered in strange apparel, and
the bride said, welcome, dear aunts.  Ah, said the bridegroom,
how do you come by these odious friends.  Thereupon he went to
the one with the broad flat foot, and said, how do you come by
such a broad foot.  By treading, she answered, by treading.  Then
the bridegroom went to the second, and said, how do you come by
your falling lip.  By licking, she answered, by licking.  Then
he asked the third, how do you come by your broad thumb.  By
twisting the thread, she answered, by twisting the thread.  On
this the king's son was alarmed and said, neither now nor ever
shall my beautiful bride touch a spinning-wheel.  And thus she
got rid of the hateful flax-spinning.
Hard by a great forest dwelt a poor wood-cutter with his wife
and his two children.  The boy was called Hansel and the
girl Gretel.  He had little to bite and to break, and once when
great dearth fell on the land, he could no longer procure even daily
bread.  Now when he thought over this by night in his bed, and
tossed about in his anxiety, he groaned and said to his wife, what
is to become of us.  How are we to feed our poor children, when
we no longer have anything even for ourselves.  I'll tell you what,
husband, answered the woman, early to-morrow morning we
will take the children out into the forest to where it is the
thickest.  There we will light a fire for them, and give each of
them one more piece of bread, and then we will go to our work and
leave them alone.  They will not find the way home again, and we
shall be rid of them.  No, wife, said the man, I will not do that.
How can I bear to leave my children alone in the forest.   The wild
animals would soon come and tear them to pieces.  O' you fool, said
she, then we must all four die of hunger, you may as well plane the
planks for our coffins, and she left him no peace until he
consented.  But I feel very sorry for the poor children, all the
same, said the man.

The two children had also not been able to sleep for hunger, and
had heard what their step-mother had said to their father.  Gretel
wept bitter tears, and said to Hansel, now all is over with us.
Be quiet, Gretel, said Hansel, do not distress yourself, I will soon
find a way to help us.  And when the old folks had fallen asleep,
he got up, put on his little coat, opened the door below, and crept
outside.  The moon shone brightly, and the white pebbles which lay
in front of the house glittered like real silver pennies.  Hansel
stooped and stuffed the little pocket of his coat with as many as he
could get in.  Then he went back and said to Gretel, be comforted,
dear little sister, and sleep in peace, God will not forsake us, and
he lay down again in his bed.  When day dawned, but before the
sun had risen, the woman came and awoke the two children, saying
get up, you sluggards.  We are going into the forest to fetch
wood.  She gave each a little piece of bread, and said, there is
something for your dinner, but do not eat it up before then, for you
will get nothing else.  Gretel took the bread under her apron, as
Hansel had the pebbles in his pocket.  Then they all set out
together on the way to the forest.  When they had walked a short
time, Hansel stood still and peeped back at the house, and did so
again and again.  His father said, Hansel, what are you looking at
there and staying behind for.  Pay attention, and do not forget how
to use your legs.  Ah, father, said Hansel, I am looking at my
little white cat, which is sitting  up on the roof, and wants to say
good-bye to me.  The wife said, fool, that is not your little cat,
that is the morning sun which is shining on the chimneys.  Hansel,
however, had not been looking back at the cat, but had been
constantly throwing one of the white pebble-stones out of his pocket
on the road.

When they had reached the middle of the forest, the father said,
now, children, pile up some wood, and I will light a fire that you
may not be cold.  Hansel and Gretel gathered brushwood together,
as high as a little hill.  The brushwood was lighted, and when the
flames were burning very high, the woman said, now, children,
lay yourselves down by the fire and rest, we will go into the forest
and cut some wood.  When we have done, we will come back and
fetch you away.

Hansel and Gretel sat by the fire, and when noon came, each ate
a little piece of bread, and as they heard the strokes of the
wood-axe they believed that their father was near.  It was not the
axe, however, but a branch which he had fastened to a withered tree
which the wind was blowing backwards and forwards.  And as they had
been sitting such a long time, their eyes closed with fatigue, and
they fell fast asleep.  When at last they awoke, it was already dark
night.  Gretel began to cry and said, how are we to get out of the
forest now.  But Hansel comforted her and said, just wait a little,
until the moon has risen, and then we will soon find the way.  And
when the full moon had risen, Hansel took his little sister by the
hand, and followed the pebbles which shone like newly-coined silver
pieces, and showed them the way.

They walked the whole night long, and by break of day came
once more to their father's house.  They knocked at the door, and
when the woman opened it and saw that it was Hansel and Gretel,
she said, you naughty children, why have you slept so long in the
forest.  We thought you were never coming back at all.  The father,
however, rejoiced, for it had cut him to the heart to leave them
behind alone.

Not long afterwards, there was once more great dearth throughout
the land, and the children heard their mother saying at night to
their father, everything is eaten again, we have one half loaf left,
and that is the end.  The children must go, we will take them
farther into the wood, so that they will not find their way out
again.  There is no other means of saving ourselves.  The man's
heart was heavy, and he thought, it would be better for you to share
the last mouthful with your children.  The woman, however, would
listen to nothing that he had to say, but scolded and reproached
him.  He who says a must say b, likewise, and as he had yielded the
first time, he had to do so a second time also.

The children, however, were still awake and had heard the
conversation.  When the old folks were asleep, Hansel again got up,
and wanted to go out and pick up pebbles as he had done before, but
the woman had locked the door, and Hansel could not get out.
Nevertheless he comforted his little sister, and said, do not cry,
Gretel, go to sleep quietly, the good God will help us.
Early in the morning came the woman, and took the children out of
their beds.  Their piece of bread was given to them, but it was
still smaller than the time before.  On the way into the forest
Hansel crumbled his in his pocket, and often stood still and threw a
morsel on the ground.  Hansel, why do you stop and look round.
Said the father, go on.  I am looking back at my little pigeon
which is sitting on the roof, and wants to say good-bye to me,
answered Hansel.  Fool.  Said the woman, that is not your little
pigeon, that is the morning sun that is shining on the chimney.
Hansel, however, little by little, threw all the crumbs on the path.
The woman led the children still deeper into the forest, where they
had never in their lives been before.  Then a great fire was again
made, and the mother said, just sit there, you children, and when
you are tired you may sleep a little.  We are going into the forest
to cut wood, and in the evening when we are done, we will come and
fetch you away.  When it was noon, Gretel shared her piece of
bread with Hansel, who had scattered his by the way.  Then they
fell asleep and evening passed, but no one came to the poor
children.  They did not awake until it was dark night, and Hansel
comforted his little sister and said, just wait, Gretel, until the
moon rises, and then we shall see the crumbs of bread which I have
strewn about, they will show us our way home again.  When the moon
came they set out, but they found no crumbs, for the many thousands
of birds which fly about in the woods and fields had picked them all
up.  Hansel said to Gretel, we shall soon find the way, but they did
not find it.  They walked the whole night and all the next day too
from morning till evening, but they did not get out of the forest,
and were very hungry, for they had nothing to eat but two or three
berries, which grew on the ground.  And as they were so weary that
their legs would carry them no longer, they lay down beneath a tree
and fell asleep.

It was now three mornings since they had left their father's house.
They began to walk again, but they always came deeper into the
forest, and if help did not come soon, they must die of hunger and
weariness.  When it was mid-day, they saw a beautiful snow-white
bird sitting on a bough, which sang so delightfully that they stood
still and listened to it.  And when its song was over, it spread its
wings and flew away before them, and they followed it until they
reached a little house, on the roof of which it alighted.  And when
they approached the little house they saw that it was built of
bread and covered with cakes, but that the windows were of clear
sugar.  We will set to work on that, said Hansel, and have a good
meal.  I will eat a bit of the roof, and you Gretel, can eat some
of the window, it will taste sweet.  Hansel reached up above, and
broke off a little of the roof to try how it tasted, and Gretel
leant against the window and nibbled at the panes.  Then a soft
voice cried from the parlor -
     nibble, nibble, gnaw
     who is nibbling at my little house.
The children answered -
     the wind, the wind,
     the heaven-born wind,
and went on eating without disturbing themselves.  Hansel, who
liked the taste of the roof, tore down a great piece of it, and
Gretel pushed out the whole of one round window-pane, sat down, and
enjoyed herself with it.  Suddenly the door opened, and a woman
as old as the hills, who supported herself on crutches, came
creeping out.  Hansel and Gretel were so terribly frightened that
they let fall what they had in their hands. The old woman, however,
nodded her head, and said, oh, you dear children, who has brought
you here.  Do come in, and stay with me.  No harm shall happen to
you.  She took them both by the hand, and led them into her little
house.  Then good food was set before them, milk and pancakes,
with sugar, apples, and nuts.  Afterwards two pretty little beds
were covered with clean white linen, and Hansel and Gretel lay down
in them, and thought they were in heaven.

The old woman had only pretended to be so kind.  She was in reality
a wicked witch, who lay in wait for children, and had only built the
little house of bread in order to entice them there.  When a child
fell into her power, she killed it, cooked and ate it, and that
was a feast day with her.  Witches have red eyes, and cannot see
far, but they have a keen scent like the beasts, and are aware when
human beings draw near.  When Hansel and Gretel came into her
neighborhood, she laughed with malice, and said mockingly, I have
them, they shall not escape me again.  Early in the morning before
the children were awake, she was already up, and when she saw both
of them sleeping and looking so pretty, with their plump and rosy
cheeks, she muttered to herself, that will be a dainty mouthful.

Then she seized Hansel with her shrivelled hand, carried
him into a little stable, and locked him in behind a grated door.
Scream as he might, it would not help him.  Then she went to
Gretel, shook her till she awoke, and cried, get up, lazy thing,
fetch some water, and cook something good for your brother, he is
in the stable outside, and is to be made fat.  When he is fat, I
will eat him.  Gretel began to weep bitterly, but it was all in
vain, for she was forced to do what the wicked witch commanded.
And now the best food was cooked for poor Hansel, but Gretel
got nothing but crab-shells.  Every morning the woman crept to the
little stable, and cried, Hansel, stretch out your finger that I may
feel if you will soon be fat.  Hansel, however, stretched out a
little bone to her, and the old woman, who had dim eyes, could not
see it, and thought it was Hansel's finger, and was astonished that
there was no way of fattening him.  When four weeks had gone by,
and Hansel still remained thin, she was seized with impatience and
would not wait any longer.  Now, then, Gretel, she cried to the
girl, stir yourself, and bring some water.  Let Hansel be fat or
lean, to-morrow I will kill him, and cook him.  Ah, how the poor
little sister did lament when she had to fetch the water, and how
her tears did flow down her cheeks.  Dear God, do help us, she
cried.  If the wild beasts in the forest had but devoured us, we
should at any rate have died together.  Just keep your noise to
yourself, said the old woman, it won't help you at all.

Early in the morning, Gretel had to go out and hang up the
cauldron with the water, and light the fire.  We will bake first,
said the old woman, I have already heated the oven, and kneaded
the dough.  She pushed poor Gretel out to the oven, from which
flames of fire were already darting.  Creep in, said the witch,
and see if it properly heated, so that we can put the bread in.
And once Gretel was inside, she intended to shut the oven and let
her bake in it, and then she would eat her, too.  But Gretel saw
what she had in mind, and said, I do not know how I am to do it.
How do I get in.  Silly goose, said the old woman, the door is big
enough.  Just look, I can get in myself, and she crept up and
thrust her head into the oven.  Then Gretel gave her a push that
drove her far into it, and shut the iron door, and fastened the
bolt.  Oh.  Then she began to howl quite horribly, but Gretel ran
away, and the godless witch was miserably burnt to death.
Gretel, however, ran like lightning to Hansel, opened his little
stable, and cried, Hansel, we are saved.  The old witch is dead.
Then Hansel sprang like a bird from its cage when the door is
opened.  How they did rejoice and embrace each other, and dance
about and kiss each other.  And as they had no longer any need to
fear her, they went into the witch's house, and in every corner
there stood chests full of pearls and jewels.  These are far better
than pebbles. Said Hansel, and thrust into his pockets whatever
could be got in, and Gretel said, I, too, will take something home
with me, and filled her pinafore full.  But now we must be off, said
Hansel, that we may get out of the witch's forest.

When they had walked for two hours, they came to a great
stretch of water.  We cannot cross, said Hansel, I see no
foot-plank, and no bridge.  And there is also no ferry, answered
Gretel, but a white duck is swimming there.  If I ask her, she
will help us over.  Then she cried -
     little duck, little duck, dost thou see,
     Hansel and Gretel are waiting for thee.
     There's never a plank, or bridge in sight,
     take us across on thy back so white.
The duck came to them, and Hansel seated himself on its back,
and told his sister to sit by him.  No, replied Gretel, that will be
too heavy for the little duck.  She shall take us across, one after
the other.  The good little duck did so, and when they were once
safely across and had walked for a short time, the forest seemed to
be more and more familiar to them, and at length they saw from
afar their father's house.  Then they began to run, rushed into the
parlor, and threw themselves round their father's neck.  The man
had not known one happy hour since he had left the children in the
forest.  The woman, however, was dead.  Gretel emptied her
pinafore until pearls and precious stones ran about the room, and
Hansel threw one handful after another out of his pocket to add to
them.  Then all anxiety was at an end, and they lived together in
perfect happiness.  My tale is done, there runs a mouse, whosoever
catches it, may make himself a big fur cap out of it.
There was once on a time a poor man, who could no longer
support his only son.  Then said the son, dear father, things go so
badly with us that I am a burden to you.  I would
rather go away and see how I can earn my bread.  So the father gave
him his blessing, and with great sorrow took leave of him.  At this
time the king of a mighty empire was at war and the youth took
service with him, and went out to fight.  And when he came before
the enemy, there was a battle, and great danger, and it rained shot
until his comrades fell on all sides, and when the leader also was
killed, those left were about to take flight, but the youth stepped
forth, spoke boldly to them, and cried, we will not let our
father-land be ruined.  Then the others followed him, and he pressed
on and conquered the enemy.  When the king heard that he owed the
victory to him alone, he raised him above all the others, gave him
great treasures, and made him the first in the kingdom.

The king had a daughter who was very beautiful, but she was
also very strange.  She had made a vow to take no one as her lord
and husband who did not promise to let himself be buried alive
with her if she died first.  If he loves me with all his heart, said
she, of what use will life be to him afterwards.  On her side she
would do the same, and if he died first, would go down to the grave
with him.  This strange oath had up to this time frightened away
all wooers, but the youth became so charmed with her beauty that
he cared for nothing, but asked her father for her.  But do you
know what you must promise, said the king.  I must be buried
with her, he replied, if I outlive her, but my love is so great that
I do not mind the danger.  Then the king consented, and the wedding
was solemnized with great splendor.

They lived now for a while happy and contented with each other,
and then it befell that the young queen was attacked by a severe
illness, and no physician could save her. And as she lay there dead,
the young king remembered what he had been obliged to promise, and
was horrified at having to lie down alive in the grave, but there
was no escape.  The king had placed sentries at all the gates, and
it was not possible to avoid his fate.  As the day came when the
corpse was to be buried, he was taken down with it into the royal
vault and then the door was shut and bolted.

Near the coffin stood a table on which were four candles, four
loaves of bread, and four bottles of wine, and when this provision
came to an end, he would have to die of hunger.  And now he sat
there full of pain and grief, ate every day only a little piece of
bread, drank only a mouthful of wine, and nevertheless saw death
daily drawing nearer.  Whilst he thus gazed before him, he saw a
snake creep out of a corner of the vault and approach the dead body.
And as he thought it came to gnaw at it, he drew his sword and said,
as long as I live, you shall not touch her, and hewed the snake in
three pieces.  After a time a second snake crept out of the hole,
and when it saw the other lying dead and cut in pieces, it went back,
but soon came again with three green leaves in its mouth.  Then it
took the three pieces of the snake, laid them together, as they
fitted, and placed one of the leaves on each wound.  Immediately the
severed parts joined themselves together, the snake moved, and
became alive again, and both of them hastened away together.  The
leaves were left lying on the ground, and a desire came into the
mind of the unhappy man who had been watching all this, to know
if the wondrous power of the leaves which had brought the snake
to life again, could not likewise be of service to a human being.

So he picked up the leaves and laid one of them on the mouth of his
dead wife, and the two others on her eyes.  And hardly had he done
this than the blood stirred in her veins, rose into her pale face,
and colored it again.  Then she drew breath, opened her eyes, and
said, ah, God, where am I.  You are with me, dear wife, he answered,
and told her how everything had happened, and how he
had brought her back again to life.  Then he gave her some wine and
bread, and when she had regained her strength, he raised her up
and they went to the door and knocked, and called so loudly that
the sentries heard it, and told the king.  The king came down
himself and opened the door, and there he found both strong and
well, and rejoiced with them that now all sorrow was over.  The
young king, however, took the three snake-leaves with him, gave
them to a servant and said, keep them for me carefully, and carry
them constantly about you.  Who knows in what trouble they may yet
be of service to us.

But a change had taken place in his wife.  After she had been
restored to life, it seemed as if all love for her husband had gone
out of her heart.  After some time, when he wanted to make a voyage
over the sea, to visit his old father, and they had gone on board a
ship, she forgot the great love and fidelity which he had shown
her, and which had been the means of rescuing her from death,
and conceived a wicked inclination for the skipper.  And once when
the young king lay there asleep, she called in the skipper and
seized the sleeper by the head, and the skipper took him by the
feet, and thus they threw him down into the sea.  When the
shameful deed was done, she said, now let us return home, and say
that he died on the way.  I will extol and praise you so to my
father that he will marry me to you, and make you the heir to his
crown.  But the faithful servant who had seen all that they did,
unseen by them, unfastened a little boat from the ship, got into it,
sailed after his master, and let the traitors go on their way.  He
fished up the dead body, and by the help of the three snake-leaves
which he carried about with him, and laid on the eyes and mouth,
he fortunately brought the young king back to life.

They both rowed with all their strength day and night, and their
little boat sailed so swiftly that they reached the old king
before the others.  He was astonished when he saw them come alone,
and asked what had happened to them.  When he learnt the wickedness
of his daughter he said, I cannot believe that she has behaved so
ill, but the truth will soon come to light, and bade both go into a
secret chamber and keep themselves hidden from everyone.  Soon
afterwards the great ship came sailing in, and the godless woman
appeared before her father with a troubled countenance.  He said,
why do you come back alone.  Where is your husband.  Ah, dear
father, she replied, I come home again in great grief.  During
the voyage, my husband became suddenly ill and died, and if the
good skipper had not given me his help, it would have gone ill with
me.  He was present at his death, and can tell you all.  The king
said, I will make the dead alive again, and opened the chamber,
and bade the two come out.  When the woman saw her husband, she
was thunderstruck, and fell on her knees and begged for mercy.

The king said, there is no mercy.  He was ready to die with you
and restored you to life again, but you have murdered him in his
sleep, and shall receive the reward that you deserve.  Then she was
placed with her accomplice in a ship which had been pierced with
holes, and sent out to sea, where they soon sank amid the waves.
A long time ago there lived a king who was famed for his wisdom
through all the land.  Nothing was hidden from him, and it seemed
as if news of the most secret things was brought to him through
the air.  But he had a strange custom, every day after dinner,
when the table was cleared, and no one else was present, a trusty
servant had to bring him one more dish.  It was covered, however,
and even the servant did not know what was in it, neither did
anyone know, for the king never took off the cover to eat of it
until he was quite alone.
This had gone on for a long time, when one day the servant, who
took away the dish, was overcome with such curiosity that he
could not help carrying the dish into his room.  When he had
carefully locked the door, he lifted up the cover, and saw a white
snake lying on the dish.  But when he saw it he could not deny
himself the pleasure of tasting it, so he cut off a little bit
and put it into his mouth.  No sooner had it touched his tongue
than he heard a strange whispering of little voices outside his
window.  He went and listened, and then noticed that it was
the sparrows who were chattering together, and telling one
another of all kinds of things which they had seen in the fields
and woods.  Eating the snake had given him power of understanding
the language of animals.
Now it so happened that on this very day the queen lost her most
beautiful ring, and suspicion of having stolen it fell upon this
trusty servant, who was allowed to go everywhere.  The king
ordered the man to be brought before him, and threatened with
angry words that unless he could before the morrow point out
the thief, he himself should be looked upon as guilty and executed.
In vain he declared his innocence, he was dismissed with no better
answer.
In his trouble and fear he went down into the courtyard and took
thought how to help himself out of his trouble.  Now
some ducks were sitting together quietly by a brook and taking
their rest, and, whilst they were making their feathers smooth
with their bills, they were having a confidential conversation
together.  The servant stood by and listened.  They were telling
one another of all the places where they had been waddling
about all the morning, and what good food they had found, and one
said in a pitiful tone, something lies heavy on my stomach, as I
was eating in haste I swallowed a ring which lay under the
queen's window.  The servant at once seized her by the neck,
carried her to the kitchen, and said to the cook, here is a fine
duck, pray, kill her.  Yes, said the cook, and weighed her in
his hand, she has spared no trouble to fatten herself, and has
been waiting to be roasted long enough.  So he cut off her head,
and as she was being dressed for the spit, the queen's ring was
found inside her.
The servant could now easily prove his innocence, and the king,
to make amends for the wrong, allowed him to ask a favor, and
promised him the best place in the court that he could wish for.
The servant refused everything, and only asked for a horse and
some money for traveling, as he had a mind to see the world
and go about a little.  When his request was granted he
set out on his way, and one day came to a pond, where he saw
three fishes caught in the reeds and gasping for water.  Now,
though it is said that fishes are dumb, he heard them lamenting
that they must perish so miserably, and, as he had a kind heart,
he got off his horse and put the three prisoners back into the
water.  They leapt with delight, put out their heads, and cried
to him, we will remember you and repay you for saving us.
He rode on, and after a while it seemed to him that he heard a
voice in the sand at his feet.  He listened, and heard an ant-king
complain, why cannot folks, with their clumsy beasts, keep off
our bodies.  That stupid horse, with his heavy hoofs, has been
treading down my people without mercy.  So he turned on to a side
path and the ant-king cried out to him, we will remember you - one
good turn deserves another.
The path led him into a wood, and here he saw two old ravens
standing by their nest, and throwing out their young ones.
Out with you, you idle, good-for-nothing creatures, cried
they, we cannot find food for you any longer, you are big enough,
and can provide for yourselves.  But the poor young ravens lay
upon the ground, flapping their wings, and crying, oh, what
helpless chicks we are.  We must shift for ourselves, and yet we
cannot fly.  What can we do, but lie here and starve.  So the
good young fellow alighted and killed his horse with his sword,
and gave it to them for food.  Then they came hopping up to it,
satisfied their hunger, and cried, we will remember you - one good
turn deserves another.
And now he had to use his own legs, and when he had walked a
long way, he came to a large city.  There was a great noise and
crowd in the streets, and a man rode up on horseback, crying
aloud, the king's daughter wants a husband, but whoever seeks her
hand must perform a hard task, and if he does not succeed he
will forfeit his life.  Many had already made the attempt, but
in vain, nevertheless when the youth saw the king's daughter
he was so overcome by her great beauty that he forgot all
danger, went before the king, and declared himself a suitor.
So he was led out to the sea, and a gold ring was thrown into
it, before his eyes, then the king ordered him to fetch this
ring up from the bottom of the sea, and added, if you come up
again without it you will be thrown in again and again until you
perish amid the waves.  All the people grieved for the handsome
youth, then they went away, leaving him alone by the sea.
He stood on the shore and considered what he should do, when
suddenly he saw three fishes come swimming towards him, and they
were the very fishes whose lives he had saved.  The one in the
middle held a mussel in its mouth, which it laid on the shore
at the youth's feet, and when he had taken it up and opened it,
there lay the gold ring in the shell.  Full of joy he took it to
the king, and expected that he would grant him the promised reward.
But when the proud princess perceived that he was not her equal
in birth, she scorned him, and required him first to perform
another task.  She went down into the garden and strewed with her
own hands ten sacks-full of millet-seed on the grass, then she
said, tomorrow morning before sunrise these must be picked up,
and not a single grain be wanting.
The youth sat down in the garden and considered how it might
be possible to perform this task, but he could think of nothing,
and there he sat sorrowfully awaiting the break of day, when he
should be led to death.  But as soon as the first rays of the
sun shone into the garden he saw all the ten sacks standing side
by side, quite full, and not a single grain was missing.  The
ant-king had come in the night with thousands and thousands of
ants, and the grateful creatures had by great industry picked
up all the millet-seed and gathered them into the sacks.
Presently the king's daughter herself came down into the garden,
and was amazed to see that the young man had done the task she
had given him.  But she could not yet conquer her proud heart,
and said, although he has performed both the tasks, he shall not
be my husband until he has brought me an apple from the tree of
life.  The youth did not know where the tree of life stood, but
he set out, and would have gone on for ever, as long as his legs
would carry him, though he had no hope of finding it.  After he
had wandered through three kingdoms, he came one evening to a
wood, and lay down under a tree to sleep.  But he heard a
rustling in the branches, and a golden apple fell into his hand.
At the same time three ravens flew down to him, perched themselves
upon his knee, and said, we are the three young ravens whom
you saved from starving, when we had grown big, and heard that
you were seeking the golden apple, we flew over the sea to the
end of the world, where the tree of life stands, and have brought
you the apple.  The youth, full of joy, set out homewards, and
took the golden apple to the king's beautiful daughter, who had
no more excuses left to make.  They cut the apple of life in two
and ate it together, and then her heart became full of love for
him, and they lived in undisturbed happiness to a great age.
One summer's morning a little tailor was sitting on his table
by the window, he was in good spirits, and sewed with all his
might.  Then came a peasant woman down the street crying, good
jams, cheap.  Good jams, cheap.  This rang pleasantly in the
tailor's ears, he stretched his delicate head out of the
window, and called, come up here, dear woman, here you will get
rid of your goods.  The woman came up the three steps to the
tailor with her heavy basket, and he made her unpack all the pots
for him.  He inspected each one, lifted it up, put his nose to it,
and at length said, the jam seems to me to be good, so weigh me
out four ounces, dear woman, and if it is a quarter of a pound
that is of no consequence.  The woman who had hoped to find a
good sale, gave him what he desired, but went away quite angry
and grumbling.  Now, this jam shall be blessed by God, cried the
little tailor, and give me health and strength.  So he brought
the bread out of the cupboard, cut himself a piece right across
the loaf and spread the jam over it.  This won't taste bitter,
said he, but I will just finish the jacket before I take a bite.
He laid the bread near him, sewed on, and in his joy, made bigger
and bigger stitches.  In the meantime the smell of the sweet jam
rose to where the flies were sitting in great numbers, and they
were attracted and descended on it in hosts.  HI, who invited you,
said the little tailor, and drove the unbidden guests away.  The
flies, however, who understood no german, would not be turned
away, but came back again in ever-increasing companies.  The
little tailor at last lost all patience,
and drew a piece of cloth from the hole under his work-table, and
saying, wait, and I will give it to you, struck it mercilessly
on them.  When he drew it away and counted, there lay before him
no fewer than seven, dead and with legs stretched out.  Are you a
fellow of that sort, said he, and could not help admiring his own
bravery.  The whole town shall know of this.  And the little tailor
hastened to cut himself a girdle, stitched it, and embroidered on
it in large letters, seven at one stroke.  What, the town, he
continued, the whole world shall hear of it.  And his heart
wagged with joy like a lamb's tail.  The tailor put on the girdle,
and resolved to go forth into the world, because he thought his
workshop was too small for his valor.  Before he went away, he
sought about in the house to see if there was anything which he
could take with him, however, he found nothing but an old cheese,
and that he put in his pocket.  In front of the door he observed a
bird which had caught itself in the thicket.  It had to go into his
pocket with the cheese.  Now he took to the road boldly, and as he
was light and nimble, he felt no fatigue.  The road led him up a
mountain, and when he had reached the highest point of it, there
sat a powerful giant looking peacefully about him.  The little
tailor went bravely up, spoke to him, and said, good day, comrade,
so you are sitting there overlooking the wide-spread world.  I am
just on my way thither, and want to try my luck.  Have you any
inclination to go with me.  The giant looked contemptuously at the
tailor, and said, you ragamuffin.  You miserable creature.
Oh, indeed, answered the little tailor, and unbuttoned his coat,
and showed the giant the girdle, there may you read what kind of
a man I am.  The giant read, seven at one stroke.  And thought
that they had been men whom the tailor had killed, and began to
feel a little respect for the tiny fellow.  Nevertheless, he
wished to try him first, and took a stone in his hand and
squeezed it together so that water dropped out of it.  Do that
likewise, said the giant, if you have strength.  Is that all, said
the tailor, that is child's play with us, and put his hand into his
pocket, brought out the soft cheese, and pressed it until the
liquid ran out
of it.  Faith, said he, that was a little better, wasn't it.  The
giant did not know what to say, and could not believe it of the
little man.  Then the giant picked up a stone and threw it so high
that the eye could scarcely follow it.  Now, little mite of a man,
do that likewise.  Well thrown, said the tailor, but after all the
stone came down to earth again, I will throw you one which shall
never come back at all.  And he put his hand into his pocket,
took out the bird, and threw it into the air.  The bird,
delighted with its liberty, rose, flew away and did not come
back.  How does that shot please you, comrade, asked the tailor.
You can certainly throw, said the giant, but now we will see if
you are able to carry anything properly.  He took the little
tailor to a mighty oak tree which lay there felled on the ground,
and said, if you are strong enough, help me to carry the tree out
of the forest.  Readily, answered the little man, take the trunk
on your shoulders, and I will raise up the branches and twigs,
after all, they are the heaviest.  The giant took the trunk on
his shoulder, but the tailor seated himself on a branch, and the
giant who could not look round, had to carry away the whole tree,
and the little tailor into the bargain, he behind, was quite
merry and happy, and whistled the song, three tailors rode forth
from the gate, as if carrying the tree were child's play.  The
giant, after he had dragged the heavy burden part of the way,
could go no further, and cried, hark you, I shall have to let the
tree fall.  The tailor sprang nimbly down, seized the tree with
both arms as if he had been carrying it, and said to the giant,
you are such a great fellow, and yet can not even carry the tree.
They went on together, and as they passed a cherry-tree, the giant
laid hold of the top of the tree where the ripest fruit was
hanging, bent it down, gave it into the tailor's hand, and bade
him eat.  But the little tailor was much too weak to hold the
tree, and when the giant let it go, it sprang back again, and the
tailor was tossed into the air with it.  When he had fallen down
again without injury, the giant said, what is this.  Have you
not strength enough to hold the weak twig.  There is no lack of
strength, answered the little tailor.  Do you think that could be
anything to a man who has
struck down seven at one blow.  I leapt over the tree because the
huntsmen are shooting down there in the thicket.  Jump as I did,
if you can do it.  The giant made the attempt, but could not get
over the tree, and remained hanging in the branches, so that in
this also the tailor kept the upper hand.
The giant said, if you are such a valiant fellow, come with me
into our cavern and spend the night with us.  The little tailor
was willing, and followed him.  When they went into the cave,
other giants were sitting there by the fire, and each of them
had a roasted sheep in his hand and was eating it.  The little
tailor looked round and thought, it is much more spacious here
than in my workshop.  The giant showed him a bed, and said he was
to lie down in it and sleep.  The bed, however, was too big for
the little tailor, he did not lie down in it, but crept into a
corner.  When it was midnight, and the giant thought that the
little tailor was lying in a sound sleep, he got up, took a great
iron bar, cut through the bed with one blow, and thought he had
finished off the grasshopper for good.  With the earliest dawn
the giants went into the forest, and had quite forgotten the little
tailor, when all at once he walked up to them quite merrily
and boldly.  The giants were terrified, they were afraid that he
would strike them all dead, and ran away in a great hurry.
The little tailor went onwards, always following his own
pointed nose.  After he had walked for a long time, he came to the
courtyard of a royal palace, and as he felt weary, he lay down
on the grass and fell asleep.  Whilst he lay there, the people
came and inspected him on all sides, and read on his girdle,
seven at one stroke.  Ah, said they, what does the great warrior
here in the midst of peace.  He must be a mighty lord.  They went
and announced him to the king, and gave it as their opinion that
if war should break out, this would be a weighty and useful man
who ought on no account to be allowed to depart.  The counsel
pleased the king, and he sent one of his courtiers to the little
tailor to offer him military service when he awoke.  The
ambassador remained standing by the sleeper, waited until he
stretched his limbs and
opened his eyes, and then conveyed to him this proposal.  For this
reason have I come here, the tailor replied, I am ready to enter
the king's service.  He was therefore honorably received and a
special dwelling was assigned him.
The soldiers, however, were set against the little tailor, and
wished him a thousand miles away.  What is to be the end of this,
they said among themselves.  If we quarrel with him, and he strikes
about him, seven of us will fall at every blow, not one of
us can stand against him.  They came therefore to a decision,
betook themselves in a body to the king, and begged for their
dismissal.  We are not prepared, said they, to stay with a man
who kills seven at one stroke.  The king was sorry that for the
sake of one he should lose all his faithful servants, wished that
he had never set eyes on the tailor, and would willingly have
been rid of him again.  But he did not venture to give him his
dismissal, for he dreaded lest he should strike him and all his
people dead, and place himself on the royal throne.  He thought
about it for a long time, and at last found good counsel.  He
sent to the little tailor and caused him to be informed that as
he was such a great warrior, he had one request to make of him.
In a forest of his country lived two giants who caused great
mischief with their robbing, murdering, ravaging, and burning,
and no one could approach them without putting himself in danger
of death.  If the tailor conquered and killed these two giants,
he would give him his only daughter to wife, and half of his
kingdom as a dowry, likewise one hundred horsemen should go with
him to assist him.  That would indeed be a fine thing for a man
like me, thought the little tailor.  One is not offered a
beautiful princess and half a kingdom every day of one's life.
Oh, yes, he replied, I will soon subdue the giants, and do not
require the help of the hundred horsemen to do it, he who can
hit seven with one blow has no need to be afraid of two.
The little tailor went forth, and the hundred horsemen followed
him.  When he came to the outskirts of the forest, he said to
his followers, just stay waiting here, I alone will soon finish
off the giants.  Then he bounded into the forest and looked about
right and left.  After a while he perceived both giants.  They lay
sleeping under a tree, and snored so that the branches waved up
and down.  The little tailor, not idle, gathered two pocketsful
of stones, and with these climbed up the tree.  When he was
half-way up, he slipped down by a branch, until he sat just above
the sleepers, and then let one stone after another fall on the
breast of one of the giants.  For a long time the giant felt
nothing, but at last he awoke, pushed his comrade, and said, why
are you knocking me.  You must be dreaming, said the other, I am
not knocking you.  They laid themselves down to sleep again, and
then the tailor threw a stone down on the second.  What is the
meaning of this, cried the other.  Why are you pelting me.  I am
not pelting you, answered the first, growling.  They disputed
about it for a time, but as they were weary they let the matter
rest, and their eyes closed once more.  The little tailor began
his game again, picked out the biggest stone, and threw it with
all his might on the breast of the first giant.  That is too
bad, cried he, and sprang up like a madman, and pushed his
companion against the tree until it shook.  The other paid him
back in the same coin, and they got into such a rage that they
tore up trees and belabored each other so long, that at last they
both fell down dead on the ground at the same time.  Then the
little tailor leapt down.  It is a lucky thing, said he, that
they did not tear up the tree on which I was sitting, or I should
have had to spring on to another like a squirrel, but we tailors
are nimble.  He drew out his sword and gave each of them a couple
of thrusts in the breast, and then went out to the horsemen and
said, the work is done, I have finished both of them off, but it
was hard work.  They tore up trees in their sore need, and
defended themselves with them, but all that is to no purpose
when a man like myself comes, who can kill seven at one blow.
But you are not wounded, asked the horsemen.  You need not
concern yourself about that, answered the tailor, they have not
bent one hair of mine.  The horsemen would not believe him, and
rode into the forest, there they found the giants swimming in their
blood, and all round about lay the torn-up trees.
The little tailor demanded of the king the promised reward.  He,
however, repented of his promise, and again bethought himself how
he could get rid of the hero.  Before you receive my daughter,
and the half of my kingdom, said he to him, you must perform one
more heroic deed.  In the forest roams a unicorn which does great
harm, and you must catch it first.  I fear one unicorn still
less than two giants.  Seven at one blow, is my kind of affair.
He took a rope and an axe with him, went forth into the forest,
and again bade those who were sent with him to wait outside.  He
had not long to seek.  The unicorn soon came towards him, and
rushed directly on the tailor, as if it would gore him with its
horn without more ado.  Softly, softly, it can't be done as
quickly as that, said he, and stood still and waited until the
animal was quite close, and then sprang nimbly behind the tree.
The unicorn ran against the tree with all its strength, and
struck its horn so fast in the trunk that it had not strength
enough to draw it out again, and thus it was caught.  Now, I have
got the bird, said the tailor, and came out from behind the tree
and put the rope round its neck, and then with his axe he hewed
the horn out of the tree, and when all was ready he led the beast
away and took it to the king.
The king still would not give him the promised reward, and made
a third demand.  Before the wedding the tailor was to catch him a
wild boar that made great havoc in the forest, and the huntsmen
should give him their help.  Willingly, said the tailor, that is
child's play.  He did not take the huntsmen with him into the
forest, and they were well pleased that he did not, for the wild
boar had several times received them in such a manner that they
had no inclination to lie in wait for him.  When the boar
perceived the tailor, it ran on him with foaming mouth and
whetted tusks, and was about to throw him to the ground, but the
hero fled and sprang into a chapel which was near, and up to the
window at once, and in one bound out again.  The boar ran in
after him, but the tailor ran round outside and shut the door
behind it, and then the raging beast, which was much too heavy
and awkward to leap out of the window, was caught.  The little
tailor called the huntsmen thither
that they might see the prisoner with their own eyes.  The hero,
however went to the king, who was now, whether he liked it or
not, obliged to keep his promise, and gave him his daughter and
the half of his kingdom.  Had he known that it was no warlike
hero, but a little tailor who was standing before him it would
have gone to his heart still more than it did.  The wedding was
held with great magnificence and small joy, and out of a
tailor a king was made.
After some time the young queen heard her husband say in his
dreams at night, boy, make me the doublet, and patch the
pantaloons, or else I will rap the yard-measure over your ears.
Then she discovered in what state of life the young lord had been
born, and next morning complained of her wrongs to her father, and
begged him to help her to get rid of her husband, who was
nothing else but a tailor.  The king comforted her and said,
leave your bedroom door open this night, and my servants shall
stand outside, and when he has fallen asleep shall go in, bind
him, and take him on board a ship which shall carry him into the
wide world.  The woman was satisfied with this, but the king's
armor-bearer, who had heard all, was friendly with the young
lord, and informed him of the whole plot.  I'll put a screw into
that business, said the little tailor.  At night he went to bed
with his wife at the usual time, and when she thought that he
had fallen asleep, she got up, opened the door, and then lay down
again.  The little tailor, who was only pretending to be asleep,
began to cry out in a clear voice, boy, make me the doublet and
patch me the pantaloons, or I will rap the yard-measure over
your ears.  I smote seven at one blow.  I killed two giants, I
brought away one unicorn and caught a wild boar, and am I to
fear those who are standing outside the room.  When these men
heard the tailor speaking thus, they were overcome by a great
dread, and ran as if the wild huntsman were behind them, and none
of them would venture anything further against him.  So the little
tailor was and remained a king to the end of his life.
	Cinderella
The wife of a rich man fell sick, and as she felt that her end
was drawing near, she called her only daughter to her bedside and
said, dear child, be good and pious, and then the
good God will always protect you, and I will look down on you
from heaven and be near you.  Thereupon she closed her eyes and
departed.  Every day the maiden went out to her mother's grave,
and wept, and she remained pious and good.  When winter came
the snow spread a white sheet over the grave, and by the time the
spring sun had drawn it off again, the man had taken another wife.
The woman had brought with her into the house two daughters,
who were beautiful and fair of face, but vile and black of heart.
Now began a bad time for the poor step-child.  Is the stupid goose
to sit in the parlor with us, they said.  He who wants to eat bread
must earn it.  Out with the kitchen-wench.  They took her pretty
clothes away from her, put an old grey bedgown on her, and gave
her wooden shoes.  Just look at the proud princess, how decked
out she is, they cried, and laughed, and led her into the kitchen.
There she had to do hard work from morning till night, get up
before daybreak, carry water, light fires, cook and wash.  Besides
this, the sisters did her every imaginable injury - they mocked her
and emptied her peas and lentils into the ashes, so that she was
forced to sit and pick them out again.  In the evening when she had
worked till she was weary she had no bed to go to, but had to sleep
by the hearth in the cinders.  And as on that account she always
looked dusty and dirty, they called her cinderella.
It happened that the father was once going to the fair, and he
asked his two step-daughters what he should bring back for them.
Beautiful dresses, said one, pearls and jewels, said the second.
And you, cinderella, said he, what will you have.  Father
break off for me the first branch which knocks against your hat on
your way home.  So he bought beautiful dresses, pearls and jewels
for his two step-daughters, and on his way home, as he was riding
through a green thicket, a hazel twig brushed against him and
knocked off his hat.  Then he broke off the branch and took it with
him.  When he reached home he gave his step-daughters the things
which they had wished for, and to cinderella he gave the branch
from the hazel-bush.  Cinderella thanked him, went to her mother's
grave and planted the branch on it, and wept so much that the tears
fell down on it and watered it.  And it grew and became a handsome
tree. Thrice a day cinderella went and sat beneath it, and wept and
prayed, and a little white bird always came on the tree, and if
cinderella expressed a wish, the bird threw down to her what she
had wished for.
It happened, however, that the king gave orders for a festival
which was to last three days, and to which all the beautiful young
girls in the country were invited, in order that his son might choose
himself a bride.  When the two step-sisters heard that they too were
to appear among the number, they were delighted, called cinderella
and said, comb our hair for us, brush our shoes and fasten our
buckles, for we are going to the wedding at the king's palace.
Cinderella obeyed, but wept, because she too would have liked to
go with them to the dance, and begged her step-mother to allow
her to do so.  You go, cinderella, said she, covered in dust and
dirt as you are, and would go to the festival.  You have no clothes
and shoes, and yet would dance.  As, however, cinderella went on
asking, the step-mother said at last, I have emptied a dish of
lentils into the ashes for you, if you have picked them out again in
two hours, you shall go with us.  The maiden went through the
back-door into the garden, and called, you tame pigeons, you
turtle-doves, and all you birds beneath the sky, come and help me
to pick
     the good into the pot,
     the bad into the crop.
Then two white pigeons came in by the kitchen window, and
afterwards the turtle-doves, and at last all the birds beneath the
sky, came whirring and crowding in, and alighted amongst the ashes.
And the pigeons nodded with their heads and began pick, pick,
pick, pick, and the rest began also pick, pick, pick, pick, and
gathered all the good grains into the dish.  Hardly had one hour
passed before they had finished, and all flew out again.  Then the
girl took the dish to her step-mother, and was glad, and believed
that now she would be allowed to go with them to the festival.
But the step-mother said, no, cinderella, you have no clothes and
you can not dance.  You would only be laughed at.  And as
cinderella wept at this, the step-mother said, if you can pick two
dishes of lentils out of the ashes for me in one hour, you shall go
with us.  And she thought to herself, that she most certainly
cannot do again.  When the step-mother had emptied the two
dishes of lentils amongst the ashes, the maiden went through the
back-door into the garden and cried, you tame pigeons, you
turtle-doves, and all you birds beneath the sky, come and help me
to pick
     the good into the pot,
     the bad into the crop.
Then two white pigeons came in by the kitchen-window, and
afterwards the turtle-doves, and at length all the birds beneath the
sky, came whirring and crowding in, and alighted amongst the
ashes.  And the doves nodded with their heads and began pick,
pick, pick, pick, and the others began also pick, pick, pick, pick,
and gathered all the good seeds into the dishes, and before half an
hour was over they had already finished, and all flew out again.
Then the maiden was delighted, and believed that she might now go
with them to the wedding.  But the step-mother said, all this will
not help.  You cannot go with us, for you have no clothes and can
not dance.  We should be ashamed of you.  On this she turned her
back on cinderella, and hurried away with her two proud daughters.
As no one was now at home, cinderella went to her mother's
grave beneath the hazel-tree, and cried -
     shiver and quiver, little tree,
     silver and gold throw down over me.
Then the bird threw a gold and silver dress down to her, and
slippers embroidered with silk and silver.  She put on the dress
with all speed, and went to the wedding.  Her step-sisters and the
step-mother however did not know her, and thought she must be a
foreign princess, for she looked so beautiful in the golden dress.
They never once thought of cinderella, and believed that she was
sitting at home in the dirt, picking lentils out of the ashes.  The
prince approached her, took her by the hand and danced with her.
He would dance with no other maiden, and never let loose of her
hand, and if any one else came to invite her, he said, this is my
partner.
She danced till it was evening, and then she wanted to go home.
But the king's son said, I will go with you and bear you company,
for he wished to see to whom the beautiful maiden belonged.
She escaped from him, however, and sprang into the
pigeon-house.  The king's son waited until her father came, and
then he told him that the unknown maiden had leapt into the
pigeon-house.  The old man thought, can it be cinderella.  And
they had to bring him an axe and a pickaxe that he might hew
the pigeon-house to pieces, but no one was inside it.  And when they
got home cinderella lay in her dirty clothes among the ashes, and
a dim little oil-lamp was burning on the mantle-piece, for
cinderella had jumped quickly down from the back of the pigeon-house
and had run to the little hazel-tree, and there she had taken off
her beautiful clothes and laid them on the grave, and the bird had
taken them away again, and then she had seated herself in the
kitchen amongst the ashes in her grey gown.
Next day when the festival began afresh, and her parents and
the step-sisters had gone once more, cinderella went to the
hazel-tree and said -
     shiver and quiver, my little tree,
     silver and gold throw down over me.
Then the bird threw down a much more beautiful dress than on
the preceding day. And when cinderella appeared at the wedding
in this dress, every one was astonished at her beauty.  The king's
son had waited until she came, and instantly took her by the hand
and danced with no one but her.  When others came and invited
her, he said, this is my partner.  When evening came she wished
to leave, and the king's son followed her and wanted to see into
which house she went.  But she sprang away from him, and into
the garden behind the house.  Therein stood a beautiful tall tree on
which hung the most magnificent pears.  She clambered so nimbly
between the branches like a squirrel that the king's son did not
know where she was gone.  He waited until her father came, and
said to him, the unknown maiden has escaped from me, and I
believe she has climbed up the pear-tree.  The father thought,
can it be cinderella.  And had an axe brought and cut the
tree down, but no one was on it.  And when they got into the
kitchen, cinderella lay there among the ashes, as usual, for she
had jumped down on the other side of the tree, had taken the
beautiful dress to the bird on the little hazel-tree, and put on her
grey gown.
On the third day, when the parents and sisters had gone away,
cinderella went once more to her mother's grave and said to the
little tree -
     shiver and quiver, my little tree,
     silver and gold throw down over me.
And now the bird threw down to her a dress which was more
splendid and magnificent than any she had yet had, and the
slippers were golden.  And when she went to the festival in the
dress, no one knew how to speak for astonishment.  The king's son
danced with her only, and if any one invited her to dance, he said
this is my partner.
When evening came, cinderella wished to leave, and the king's
son was anxious to go with her, but she escaped from him so quickly
that he could not follow her.  The king's son, however, had
employed a ruse, and had caused the whole staircase to be smeared
with pitch, and there, when she ran down, had the maiden's left
slipper remained stuck.  The king's son picked it up, and it was
small and dainty, and all golden.  Next morning, he went with it to
the father, and said to him, no one shall be my wife but she whose
foot this golden slipper fits.  Then were the two sisters glad,
for they had pretty feet.  The eldest went with the shoe into her
room and wanted to try it on, and her mother stood by.  But she
could not get her big toe into it, and the shoe was too small for
her.  Then her mother gave her a knife and said, cut the toe off,
when you are queen you will have no more need to go on foot.  The
maiden cut the toe off, forced the foot into the shoe, swallowed
the pain, and went out to the king's son.  Then he took her on his
his horse as his bride and rode away with her.  They were
obliged, however, to pass the grave, and there, on the hazel-tree,
sat the two pigeons and cried -
     turn and peep, turn and peep,
     there's blood within the shoe,
     the shoe it is too small for her,
     the true bride waits for you.
Then he looked at her foot and saw how the blood was trickling
from it.  He turned his horse round and took the false bride
home again, and said she was not the true one, and that the
other sister was to put the shoe on.  Then this one went into her
chamber and got her toes safely into the shoe, but her heel was
too large.  So her mother gave her a knife and said,  cut a bit
off your heel, when you are queen you will have no more need
to go on foot.  The maiden cut a bit off her heel, forced
her foot into the shoe, swallowed the pain, and went out to the
king's son.  He took her on his horse as his bride, and rode away
with her, but when they passed by the hazel-tree, the two pigeons
sat on it and cried -
     turn and peep, turn and peep,
     there's blood within the shoe,
     the shoe it is too small for her,
     the true bride waits for you.
He looked down at her foot and saw how the blood was running
out of her shoe, and how it had stained her white stocking quite
red.  Then he turned his horse and took the false bride home
again.  This also is not the right one, said he, have you no
other daughter.  No, said the man, there is still a little
stunted kitchen-wench which my late wife left behind her, but
she cannot possibly be the bride.  The king's son said he was
to send her up to him, but the mother answered, oh, no, she is
much too dirty, she cannot show herself.  But he absolutely
insisted on it, and cinderella had to be called.  She first
washed her hands and face clean, and then went and bowed down
before the king's son, who gave her the golden shoe.  Then she
seated herself on a stool, drew her foot out of the heavy
wooden shoe, and put it into the slipper, which fitted like a
glove.  And when she rose up and the king's son looked at her
face he recognized the beautiful maiden who had danced with
him and cried, that is the true bride.  The step-mother and
the two sisters were horrified and became pale with rage, he,
however, took cinderella on his horse and rode away with her.  As
they passed by the hazel-tree, the two white doves cried -
     turn and peep, turn and peep,
     no blood is in the shoe,
     the shoe is not too small for her,
     the true bride rides with you,
and when they had cried that, the two came flying down and
placed themselves on cinderella's shoulders, one on the right,
the other on the left, and remained sitting there.
When the wedding with the king's son was to be celebrated, the
two false sisters came and wanted to get into favor with
cinderella and share her good fortune.  When the betrothed
couple went to church, the elder was at the right side and the
younger at the left, and the pigeons pecked out one eye from
each of them.  Afterwards as they came back the elder was at
the left, and the younger at the right, and then the pigeons
pecked out the other eye from each.  And thus, for their
wickedness and falsehood, they were punished with blindness
all their days.
There was once a king's son who was seized with a desire to travel
about the world, and took no one with him but a faithful servant.
One day he came to a great forest, and when darkness overtook him
he could find no shelter, and knew not where to pass the night.
Then he saw a girl who was going towards a small house, and when
he came nearer, he saw that the maiden was young and beautiful.
He spoke to her, and said, dear child, can I and my servant find
shelter for the night in the little house.  Oh, yes, said the
girl in a sad voice, that you certainly can, but I do not advise
you to venture it.  Do not go in.  Why not, asked the king's son.
The maiden sighed and said, my step-mother
practises wicked arts.  She is ill-disposed toward strangers.
Then he saw very well that he had come to the house of a witch,
but as it was dark, and he could not go farther, and also was
not afraid, he entered.  The old woman was sitting in an armchair
by the fire, and looked at the stranger with her red eyes.  Good
evening, growled she, and pretended to be quite friendly.  Take
a seat and rest yourselves.  She fanned the fire on which she was
cooking something in a small pot.  The daughter warned the two to
be prudent, to eat nothing, and drink nothing, for the old woman
brewed evil drinks.  They slept quietly until early morning.  When
they were making ready for their departure, and the king's son was
already seated on his horse, the old woman said, stop a moment,
I will first hand you a parting draught.  Whilst she fetched
it, the king's son rode away, and the servant who had to buckle
his saddle tight, was the only one present when the wicked witch
came with the drink.  Take that to your master, said she.  But
at that instant the glass broke and the poison spirted on the
horse, and it was so strong that the animal immediately fell down
dead.  The servant ran after his master and told him what had
happened, but as he did not want to leave his saddle behind, he
ran back to fetch it.  When he came to the dead horse, however,
a raven was already sitting on it devouring it.  Who knows
whether we shall find anything better to-day, said the servant.
So he killed the raven, and took it with him.  And now they
journeyed onwards into the forest the whole day, but could not
get out of it.  By nightfall they found an inn and entered it.
The servant gave the raven to the innkeeper to prepare for supper.
They had stumbled, however, on a den of murderers, and during
the darkness twelve of these came, intending to kill the strangers
and rob them.  But before they set about this work, they sat down
to supper, and the innkeeper and the witch sat down with them,
and together they ate a dish of soup in which was cut up the
flesh of the raven.  Hardly had they swallowed a couple of
mouthfuls, before they all fell down dead, for the raven had
communicated to them the poison from the horse-flesh.  There
was no no one else left in the house but the innkeeper's daughter,
who was
honest, and had taken no part in their godless deeds.  She
opened all doors to the stranger and showed him the store of
treasures.  But the king's son said she might keep everything, he
would have none of it, and rode onwards with his servant.
After they had traveled about for a long time, they came to a
town in which was a beautiful but proud princess, who had made it
known that whosoever should set her a riddle which she could
not guess, that man should be her husband.  But if she guessed
it, his head must be cut off.  She had three days to guess it
in, but was so clever that she always found the answer to the
riddle given her before the appointed time.  Nine suitors had
already perished in this manner, when the king's son arrived, and
blinded by her great beauty, was willing to stake his life for
it.  Then he went to her and laid his riddle before her.  What
is this, said he.  One slew none, and yet slew twelve.  She
did not know what that was.  She thought and thought, but she
could not solve it.  She opened her riddle-books, but it was
not in them - in short, her wisdom was at an end.  As she
did not know how to help herself, she ordered her maid to
creep into the lord's sleeping-chamber, and listen to his
dreams, and thought that he would perhaps speak in his sleep
and reveal the riddle.  But the clever servant had placed
himself in the bed instead of his master, and when the maid
came there, he tore off from her the mantle in which she had
wrapped herself, and chased her out with rods.  The second night
the king's daughter sent her maid-in-waiting, who was to see
if she could succeed better in listening, but the servant
took her mantle also away from her, and hunted her out with
rods.  Now the master believed himself safe for the third
night, and lay down in his own bed.  Then came the princess
herself, and she had put on a misty-grey mantle, and she
seated herself near him.  And when she thought that he was
asleep and dreaming, she spoke to him, and hoped that he
would answer in his sleep, as many do, but he was awake, and
understood and heard everything quite well.  Then she asked,
one slew none, what is that.  He replied, a raven, which
ate of a dead and poisoned horse, and died of it.  She
inquired further, and yet slew twelve, what is that.  He
answered, that means twelve murderers, who ate the raven and died
of it.
When she knew the answer to the riddle she wanted to steal
away, but he held her mantle so fast that she was forced to
leave it behind her.  Next morning, the king's daughter
announced that she had guessed the riddle, and sent for the
twelve judges and expounded it before them.  But the youth
begged for a hearing, and said, she stole into my room in the
night and questioned me, otherwise she could not have
discovered it.  The judges said, bring us a proof of this.
Then were the three mantles brought thither by the servant,
and when the judges saw the misty-grey one which the king's
daughter usually wore, they said, let the mantle be
embroidered with gold and silver, and then it will be your
wedding-mantle.
There was once a widow who had two daughters - one of
whom was pretty and industrious, whilst the other was ugly
and idle.  But she was much fonder of the ugly and idle one,
because she was her own daughter.  And the other, who was a
step-daughter, was obliged to do all the work, and be the
cinderella of the house.  Every day the poor girl had to sit by a
well, in the highway, and spin and spin till her fingers bled.
Now it happened that one day the shuttle was marked with her
blood, so she dipped it in the well, to wash the mark off, but it
dropped out of her hand and fell to the bottom.  She began to
weep, and ran to her step-mother and told her of the mishap.  But
she scolded her sharply, and was so merciless as to say, since
you have let the shuttle fall in, you must fetch it out again.
So the girl went back to the well, and did not know what to do.
And in the sorrow of her heart she jumped into the well to get the
shuttle.  She lost her senses.  And when she awoke and came to
herself again, she was in a lovely meadow where the sun was
shining and many thousands of flowers were growing.  Across this
meadow she went, and at last came to a baker's oven full of bread,
and the bread cried out, oh, take me out. Take me out. Or I shall
burn.  I have been baked a long time.  So she went up to it, and
took out all the loaves one after another with the bread-shovel.
After that she went on till she came to a tree covered with apples,
which called out to her,  oh, shake me. Shake me. We apples are
all ripe.  So she shook the tree till the apples fell like rain,
and went on shaking till they were all down, and when she had
gathered them into a heap, she went on her way.
At last she came to a little house, out of which an old woman
peeped.  But she had such large teeth that the girl was
frightened, and was about to run away.  But the old woman called
out to her, what are you afraid of, dear child.  Stay with me.
If you will do all the work in the house properly, you shall be
the better for it.  Only you must take care to make my bed well,
and shake it thoroughly till the feathers fly - for then there
is snow on the earth.  I am mother holle.
As the old woman spoke so kindly to her, the girl took courage
and agreed to enter her service.  She attended to everything to the
satisfaction of her mistress, and always shook her bed so vigorously
that the feathers flew about like snow-flakes.  So she had a
pleasant life with her.  Never an angry word.  And to eat she had
boiled or roast meat every day.
She stayed some time with mother holle, before she became sad.
At first she did not know what was the matter with her, but found
at length that it was home-sickness.  Although she was many thousand
times better off here than at home, still she had a longing to be
there.  At last she said to the old woman, I have a longing for
home, and however well off I am down here, I cannot stay any
longer.  I must go up again to my own people.  Mother holle said,
I am pleased that you long for your home again, and as you have
served me so truly, I myself will take you up again.  Thereupon
she took her by the hand, and led her to a large door.  The door
was opened, and just as the maiden was standing beneath the
doorway, a heavy shower of golden rain fell, and all the gold clung
to her, so that she was completely covered over with it.
You shall have that because you have been so industrious, said
mother holle, and at the same time she gave her back the shuttle
which she had let fall into the well.  Thereupon the door closed,
and the maiden found herself up above upon the earth, not far
from her mother's house.
And as she went into the yard the cock was sitting on the well,
and cried -
     cock-a-doodle-doo.
     Your golden girl's come back to you.
So she went in to her mother, and as she arrived thus covered with
gold, she was well received, both by her and her sister.
The girl told all that had happened to her, and as soon as the
mother heard how she had come by so much wealth, she was very
anxious to obtain the same good luck for the ugly and lazy daughter.
She had to seat herself by the well and spin.  And in order that
her shuttle might be stained with blood, she stuck her hand into a
thorn bush and pricked her finger.  Then she threw her shuttle
into the well, and jumped in after it.
She came, like the other, to the beautiful meadow and walked
along the very same path.  When she got to the oven the bread again
cried, oh, take me out. Take me out. Or I shall burn.  I have been
baked a long time.  But the lazy thing answered, as if I had any
wish to make myself dirty. And on she went.  Soon she came to the
apple-tree, which cried, oh, shake me. Shake me. We apples are all
ripe.  But she answered, I like that.  One of you might fall on
my head, and so went on.  When she came to mother holle's house
she was not afraid, for she had already heard of her big teeth, and
she hired herself to her immediately.
The first day she forced herself to work diligently, and obeyed
mother holle when she told her to do anything, for she was thinking
of all the gold that she would give her.  But on the second day
she began to be lazy, and on the third day still more so, and then
she would not get up in the morning at all.  Neither did she make
mother holle's bed as she ought, and did not shake it so as to
make the feathers fly up.  Mother holle was soon tired of this, and
gave her notice to leave.  The lazy girl was willing enough to go,
and thought that now the golden rain would come.  Mother holle led
her also to the great door, but while she was standing beneath it,
instead of the gold a big kettleful of pitch was emptied over her.
That is the reward for your service, said mother holle, and shut
the door.
So the lazy girl went home, but she was quite covered with pitch,
and the cock on the well, as soon as he saw her, cried out -
     cock-a-doodle-doo.
     Your dirty girl's come back to you.
But the pitch clung fast to her, and could not be got off as long
as she lived.
There was once a man who had seven sons, and still he had
no daughter, however much he wished for one.  At length his
wife again gave him hope of a child, and when it came into
the world it was a girl.  The joy was great, but the child was
sickly and small, and had to be privately baptized on account of
its weakness.  The father sent one of the boys in haste to the
spring to fetch water for the baptism.  The other six went with
him, and as each of them wanted to be first to fill it, the jug
fell into the well.  There they stood and did not know what to do,
and none of them dared to go home.  As they still did not return,
the father grew impatient, and said, they have certainly forgotten
it while playing some game, the wicked boys.  He became afraid that
the girl would have to die without being baptized, and in his
anger cried, I wish the boys were all turned into ravens.  Hardly
was the word spoken before he heard a whirring of wings over his
head, looked up and saw seven coal-black ravens flying away.

The parents could not withdraw the curse, and however sad they
were at the loss of their seven sons, they still to some extent
comforted themselves with their dear little daughter, who soon
grew strong and every day became more beautiful.  For a long time
she did not know that she had had brothers, for her parents were
careful not to mention them before her, but one day she
accidentally heard some people saying of herself, that the girl was
certainly beautiful, but that in reality she was to blame for the
misfortune which had befallen her seven brothers.  Then she was much
troubled, and went to her father and mother and asked if it was
true that she had had brothers, and what had become of them.  The
parents now dared keep the secret no longer, but said that what
had befallen her brothers was the will of heaven, and that her
birth had only been the innocent cause.  But the maiden took it to
heart daily, and thought she must save her brothers.  She had no
rest or peace until she set out secretly, and went forth into the
wide world to search for her brothers and set them free, let it
cost what it might.  She took nothing with her but a little ring
belonging to her parents as a keepsake, a loaf of bread against
hunger, a little pitcher of water against thirst, and a little
chair as a provision against weariness.

And now she went continually onwards, far, far to the very end of
the world.  Then she came to the sun, but it was too hot and
terrible, and devoured little children.  Hastily she ran away, and
ran to the moon, but it was far too cold, and also awful and
malicious, and when it saw the child, it said, I smell, I smell
the flesh of men.  At this she ran swiftly away, and came to the
stars, which were kind and good to her, and each of them sat on its
own particular little chair.  But the morning star arose, and gave
her the drumstick of a chicken, and said, if you have not that
drumstick you can not open the glass mountain, and in the glass
mountain are your brothers.

The maiden took the drumstick, wrapped it carefully in a cloth,
and went onwards again until she came to the glass mountain.  The
door was shut, and she thought she would take out the drumstick.
But when she undid the cloth, it was empty, and she had lost the
good star's present.  What was she now to do.  She wished to rescue
her brothers, and had no key to the glass mountain.  The good
sister took a knife, cut off one of her little fingers, put it in
the door, and succeeded in opening it.  When she had gone inside, a
little dwarf came to meet her, who said, my child, what are you
looking for.  I am looking for my brothers, the seven ravens, she
replied.  The dwarf said, the lord ravens are not at home, but if
you will wait here until they come, step in.  Thereupon the little
dwarf carried the ravens' dinner in, on seven little plates, and
in seven little glasses, and the little sister ate a morsel from
each plate, and from each little glass she took a sip, but in the
last little glass she dropped the ring which she had brought away
with her.

Suddenly she heard a whirring of wings and a rushing through
the air, and then the little dwarf said, now the lord ravens are
flying home.  Then they came, and wanted to eat and drink, and
looked for their little plates and glasses.  Then said one after
the other, who has eaten something from my plate.  Who has drunk
out of my little glass.  It was a human mouth.  And when the
seventh came to the bottom of the glass, the ring rolled against
his mouth.  Then he looked at it, and saw that it was a ring
belonging to his father and mother, and said, God grant that our
sister may be here, and then we shall be free.  When the maiden,
who was standing behind the door watching, heard that wish,
she came forth, and on this all the ravens were restored to their
human form again.  And they embraced and kissed each other,
and went joyfully home.
	Little Red-Cap

Once upon a time there was a dear little girl who was loved
by every one who looked at her, but most of all by her
grandmother, and there was nothing that she would not have
given to the child.  Once she gave her a little cap of red
velvet, which suited her so well that she would never wear
anything else.  So she was always called little red-cap.

One day her mother said to her, come, little red-cap, here
is a piece of cake and a bottle of wine.  Take them to your
grandmother, she is ill and weak, and they will do her good.
Set out before it gets hot, and when you are going, walk
nicely and quietly and do not run off the path, or you may
fall and break the bottle, and then your grandmother will
get nothing.  And when you go into her room, don't forget
to say, good-morning, and don't peep into every corner before
you do it.

I will take great care, said little red-cap to her mother, and
gave her hand on it.

The grandmother lived out in the wood, half a league from the
village, and just as little red-cap entered the wood, a wolf
met her.  Red-cap did not know what a wicked creature he was,
and was not at all afraid of him.

"Good-day, little red-cap," said he.

"Thank you kindly, wolf."

"Whither away so early, little red-cap?"

"To my grandmother's."

"What have you got in your apron?"

"Cake and wine.  Yesterday was baking-day, so poor sick
grandmother is to have something good, to make her stronger."

"Where does your grandmother live, little red-cap?"

"A good quarter of a league farther on in the wood.  Her house
stands under the three large oak-trees, the nut-trees are just
below.  You surely must know it," replied little red-cap.

The wolf thought to himself, what a tender young creature.  What a
nice plump mouthful, she will be better to eat than the old
woman.  I must act craftily, so as to catch both.  So he walked
for a short time by the side of little red-cap, and then he
said, "see little red-cap, how pretty the flowers are about here.
Why do you not look round.  I believe, too, that you do not
hear how sweetly the little birds are singing.  You walk gravely
along as if you were going to school, while everything else out
here in the wood is merry."

Little red-cap raised her eyes, and when she saw the sunbeams
dancing here and there through the trees, and pretty flowers
growing everywhere, she thought, suppose I take grandmother a
fresh nosegay.  That would please her too.  It is so early in the
day that I shall still get there in good time.  And so she ran
from the path into the wood to look for flowers.  And whenever
she had picked one, she fancied that she saw a still prettier one
farther on, and ran after it, and so got deeper and deeper into
the wood.

Meanwhile the wolf ran straight to the grandmother's house and
knocked at the door.

"Who is there?"

"Little red-cap," replied the wolf.  "She is bringing cake and
wine.  Open the door."

"Lift the latch," called out the grandmother, "I am too weak, and
cannot get up."

The wolf lifted the latch, the door sprang open, and without
saying a word he went straight to the grandmother's bed, and
devoured her.  Then he put on her clothes, dressed himself in
her cap, laid himself in bed and drew the curtains.

Little red-cap, however, had been running about picking flowers,
and when she had gathered so many that she could carry
no more, she remembered her grandmother, and set out on the
way to her.

She was surprised to find the cottage-door standing open, and
when she went into the room, she had such a strange feeling that
she said to herself, oh dear, how uneasy I feel to-day, and at
other times I like being with grandmother so much.  She called
out, "good morning," but received no answer.  So she went to the
bed and drew back the curtains.  There lay her grandmother with
her cap pulled far over her face, and looking very strange.

"Oh, grandmother," she said, "what big ears you have."

"The better to hear you with, my child," was the reply.

"But, grandmother, what big eyes you have," she said.

"The better to see you with," my dear.

"But, grandmother, what large hands you have."

"The better to hug you with."

"Oh, but, grandmother, what a terrible big mouth you have."

"The better to eat you with."

And scarcely had the wolf said this, than with one bound he was
out of bed and swallowed up red-cap.

When the wolf had appeased his appetite, he lay down again in
the bed, fell asleep and began to snore very loud.  The
huntsman was just passing the house, and thought to himself, how
the old woman is snoring.  I must just see if she wants anything.

So he went into the room, and when he came to the bed, he saw
that the wolf was lying in it.  Do I find you here, you old
sinner, said he.  I have long sought you.  Then just as he was going
to fire at him, it occurred to him that the wolf might have
devoured the grandmother, and that she might still be saved, so
he did not fire, but took a pair of scissors, and began to cut
open the stomach of the sleeping wolf.  When he had made two
snips, he saw the little red-cap shining, and then he made two
snips more, and the little girl sprang out, crying, ah, how
frightened I have been.  How dark it was inside the wolf.  And
after that the aged grandmother came out alive also, but scarcely
able to breathe.  Red-cap, however, quickly
fetched great stones with which they filled the wolf's belly, and
when he awoke, he wanted to run away, but the stones were so
heavy that he collapsed at once, and fell dead.

Then all three were delighted.  The huntsman drew off the wolf's
skin and went home with it.  The grandmother ate the cake and
drank the wine which red-cap had brought, and revived, but
red-cap thought to herself, as long as I live, I will never by
myself leave the path, to run into the wood, when my mother has
forbidden me to do so.

It is also related that once when red-cap was again taking cakes
to the old grandmother, another wolf spoke to her, and tried to
entice her from the path.  Red-cap, however, was on her guard,
and went straight forward on her way, and told her grandmother
that she had met the wolf, and that he had said good-morning to
her, but with such a wicked look in his eyes, that if they had
not been on the public road she was certain he would have eaten
her up.  Well, said the grandmother, we will shut the door, that
he may not come in.  Soon afterwards the wolf knocked, and cried,
open the door, grandmother, I am little red-cap, and am bringing
you some cakes.  But they did not speak, or open the door, so
the grey-beard stole twice or thrice round the house, and at last
jumped on the roof, intending to wait until red-cap went home in
the evening, and then to steal after her and devour her in the
darkness.  But the grandmother saw what was in his thoughts.  In
front of the house was a great stone trough, so she said to the
child, take the pail, red-cap.  I made some sausages yesterday,
so carry the water in which I boiled them to the trough.  Red-cap
carried until the great trough was quite full.   Then the smell
of the sausages reached the wolf, and he sniffed and peeped
down, and at last stretched out his neck so far that he could
no longer keep his footing and began to slip, and slipped down
from the roof straight into the great trough, and was drowned.
But red-cap went joyously home, and no one ever did anything
to harm her again.
In a certain country there was once great lamentation over a
wild boar that laid waste the farmer's fields, killed the cattle,
and ripped up people's bodies with his tusks.  The king promised
a large reward to anyone who would free the land from this plague,
but the beast was so big and strong that no one dared to go near
the forest in which it lived.  At last the king gave notice
that whosoever should capture or kill the wild boar should have
his only daughter to wife.

Now there lived in the country two brothers, sons of a poor man,
who declared themselves willing to undertake the hazardous
enterprise, the elder, who was crafty and shrewd, out of pride,
the younger, who was innocent and simple, from a kind heart.
The king said, in order that you may be the more sure of finding
the beast, you must go into the forest from opposite sides.  So
the elder went in on the west side, and the younger on the east.
When the younger had gone a short way, a little man stepped
up to him.  He held in his hand a black spear and said, I give
you this spear because your heart is pure and good, with this
you can boldly attack the wild boar, and it will do you no harm.
He thanked the little man, shouldered the spear, and went on
fearlessly.

Before long he saw the beast, which rushed at him, but he held
the spear towards it, and in its blind fury it ran so swiftly
against it that its heart was cloven in twain.  Then he took the
monster on his back and went homewards with it to the king.
As he came out at the other side of the wood, there stood at the
entrance a house where people were making merry with wine and
dancing.  His elder brother had gone in here, and, thinking that
after all the boar would not run away from him, was going to drink
until he felt brave.  But when he saw his young brother coming out
of the wood laden with his booty, his envious, evil heart gave him
no peace.  He called out to him, come in, dear brother, rest and
refresh yourself with a cup of wine.

The youth, who suspected no evil, went in and told him about the
good little man who had given him the spear wherewith he had slain
the boar.

The elder brother kept him there until the evening, and then they
went away together, and when in the darkness they came to a
bridge over a brook, the elder brother let the other go first, and
when he was half-way across he gave him such a blow from behind
that he fell down dead.  He buried him beneath the bridge, took
the boar, and carried it to the king, pretending that he had
killed it, whereupon he obtained the king's daughter in marriage.
And when his younger brother did not come back he said, the boar
must have ripped up his body, and every one believed it.
But as nothing remains hidden from God, so this black deed also
was to come to light.

Years afterwards a shepherd was driving his herd across the
bridge, and saw lying in the sand beneath, a snow-white little
bone.  He thought that it would make a good mouth-piece, so
he clambered down, picked it up, and cut out of it a mouth-piece
for his horn,  but when he blew through it for the first time,
to his great astonishment, the bone began of its own accord to
sing -
     ah, friend thou blowest upon my bone.
     Long have I lain beside the water,
     my brother slew me for the boar,
     and took for his wife the king's young daughter.

What a wonderful horn, said the shepherd, it sings by itself,
I must take it to my lord the king.  And when he came with it to
the king the horn again began to sing its little song.  The
king understood it all, and caused the ground below the bridge
to be dug up, and then the whole skeleton of the murdered man
came to light.  The wicked brother could not deny the deed, and
was sewn up in a sack and drowned.  But the bones of the murdered
man were laid to rest in a beautiful tomb in the churchyard.
There was once a poor woman who gave birth to a little son,
and as he came into the world with a caul on, it was predicted
that in his fourteenth year he would have the king's daughter
for his wife.  It happened that soon afterwards the king
came into the village, and no one knew that he was the king,
and when he asked the people what news there was, they answered,
a child has just been born with a caul on, whatever anyone so
born undertakes turns out well.  It is prophesied, too, that
in his fourteenth year he will have the king's daughter for his
wife.

The king, who had a bad heart, and was angry about the prophecy,
went to the parents, and, seeming quite friendly, said, you poor
people, let me have your child, and I will take care of it.  At
first they refused, but when the stranger offered them a large
amount of gold for it, and they thought, it is a child of good
fortune, and everything must turn out well for it, they at last
consented, and gave him the child.

The king put it in a box and rode away with it until he came to
a deep piece of water, then he threw the box into it and thought,
I have freed my daughter from her undesired suitor.

The box, however, did not sink, but floated like a boat, and not
a drop of water made its way into it.  And it floated to within
two miles of the king's chief city, where there was a mill, and
it came to a halt at the mill-dam.  A miller's boy, who by good
luck was standing there, noticed it and pulled it out with a hook,
thinking that he had found a great treasure, but when he opened
it there lay a pretty boy inside, quite fresh and lively.  He
took him to the miller and his wife, and as they had no children
they were glad, and said, "God has given him to us."  They took
great care of the foundling, and he grew up in all goodness.

It happened that once in a storm, the king went into the mill, and
asked the mill-folk if the tall youth were their son.  No,
answered they, he's a foundling.  Fourteen years ago he floated
down to the mill-dam in a box, and the mill-boy pulled him out
of the water.

Then the king knew that it was none other than the child of
good fortune which he had thrown into the water, and he said,
my good people, could not the youth take a letter to the queen.
I will give him two gold pieces as a reward.  Just as the king
commands, answered they, and they told the boy to hold himself
in readiness.  Then the king wrote a letter to the queen, wherein
he said, as soon as the boy arrives with this letter, let him be
killed and buried, and all must be done before I come home.
The boy set out with this letter, but he lost his way, and in the
evening came to a large forest.  In the darkness he saw a small
light, he went towards it and reached a cottage.  When he went in,
an old woman was sitting by the fire quite alone.  She started
when she saw the boy, and said, whence do you come, and whither
are you going.  I come from the mill, he answered, and wish
to go to the queen, to whom I am taking a letter, but as I have
lost my way in the forest I should like to stay here over night.
You poor boy, said the woman, you have come into a den of thieves,
and when they come home they will kill you.  Let them come,
said the boy, I am not afraid, but I am so tired that I cannot go
any farther.  And he stretched himself upon a bench and fell
asleep.

Soon afterwards the robbers came, and angrily asked what strange
boy was lying there.  Ah, said the old woman, it is an innocent
child who has lost himself in the forest, and out of pity I have
let him come in, he has to take a letter to the queen.  The robbers
opened the letter and read it, and in it was written that the
boy as soon as he arrived should be put to death.  Then the
hardhearted robbers felt pity, and their leader tore up the letter
and wrote another, saying, that as soon as the boy came, he should
be married at once to the king's daughter.  Then they let him lie
quietly on the bench until the next morning, and when he awoke
they gave him the letter, and showed him the right way.

And the queen, when she had received the letter and read it,
did as was written in it, and had a splendid wedding-feast
prepared, and the king's daughter was married to the child of
good fortune, and as the youth was handsome and friendly she lived
with him in joy and contentment.

After some time the king returned to his palace and saw that
the prophecy was fulfilled, and the child married to his daughter.
How has that come to pass, said he, I gave quite another order
in my letter.

So the queen gave him the letter, and said that he might see for
himself what was written in it.  The king read the letter and
saw quite well that it had been exchanged for the other.  He
asked the youth what had become of the letter entrusted to him,
and why he had brought another instead of it.  I know nothing
about it, answered he, it must have been changed in the night,
when I slept in the forest.  The king said in a passion, you shall
not have everything quite so much your own way, whosoever marries
my daughter must fetch me from hell three golden hairs from
the head of the devil, bring me what I want, and you shall keep
my daughter.  In this way the king hoped to be rid of him for ever.
But the child of good fortune answered, I will fetch the golden
hairs, I am not afraid of the devil.  Whereupon he took leave of
them and began his journey.

The road led him to a large town, where the watchman by the gates
asked him what his trade was, and what he knew.  I know
everything, answered the child of good fortune.  Then you can do us
a favor, said the watchman, if you will tell us why our market
fountain, which once flowed with wine has become dry, and no
longer gives even water.  That you shall know, answered he, only
wait until I come back.

Then he went farther and came to another town, and there also the
gatekeeper asked him what was his trade, and what he knew.
I know everything, answered he.  Then you can do us a favor and
tell us why a tree in our town which once bore golden apples now
does not even put forth leaves.  You shall know that, answered he,
only wait until I come back.

Then he went on and came to a wide river over which he must cross.
The ferryman asked him what his trade was, and what he knew.  I
know everything, answered he.  Then you can do me a favor, said
the ferryman, and tell me why I must always be rowing backwards
and forwards, and am never set free.  You shall know that,
answered he, only wait until I come back.

When he had crossed the water he found the entrance to hell.  It
was black and sooty within, and the devil was not at home, but
his grandmother was sitting in a large arm-chair.  What do you
want, said she to him, but she did not look so very wicked.  I
should like to have three golden hairs from the devil's head,
answered he, else I cannot keep my wife.  That is a good deal
to ask for, said she, if the devil comes home and finds you, it
will cost you your life, but as I pity you, I will see if I cannot
help you.

She changed him into an ant and said, creep into the folds of my
dress, you will be safe there.  Yes, answered he, so far, so good,
but there are three things besides that I want to know - why a
fountain which once flowed with wine has become dry, and no
longer gives even water, why a tree which once bore golden apples
does not even put forth leaves, and why a ferryman must always be
going backwards and forwards, and is never set free.
Those are difficult questions, answered she, but just be silent
and quiet and pay attention to what the devil says when I pull out
the three golden hairs.

As the evening came on, the devil returned home.  No sooner had he
entered than he noticed that the air was not pure.  I smell man's
flesh, said he, all is not right here.  Then he pried into
every corner, and searched, but could not find anything.  His
grandmother scolded him.  It has just been swept, said she, and
everything put in order, and now you are upsetting it again, you
have always got man's flesh in your nose.  Sit down and eat your
supper.

When he had eaten and drunk he was tired, and laid his head in
his grandmother's lap, and told her she should louse him a little.
It was not long before he was fast asleep, snoring and breathing
heavily.  Then the old woman took hold of a golden hair, pulled
it out, and laid it down beside her.  Oh, cried the devil,
what are you doing.  I have had a bad dream, answered the
grandmother, so I seized hold of your hair.  What did you dream
then, said the devil.  I dreamt that a fountain in a market-place
from which wine once flowed was dried up, and not even water
would flow out of it - what is the cause of it.  Oh, ho, if they
did but know it, answered the devil, there is a toad sitting
under a stone in the well - if they killed it, the wine would flow
again.

The grandmother loused him again until he went to sleep and
snored so that the windows shook.  Then she pulled the second hair
out.  Ha, what are you doing, cried the devil angrily.  Do not
take it ill, said she, I did it in a dream.  What have you dreamt
this time, asked he.  I dreamt that in a certain kingdom there
stood an apple-tree which had once borne golden apples, but now
would not even bear leaves.  What, think you, was the reason.
Oh, if they did but know, answered the devil.  A mouse is
gnawing at the root - if they killed it they would have golden
apples again, but if it gnaws much longer the tree will wither
altogether.  But I have had enough of your dreams, if you disturb
me in my sleep again you will get a box on the ear.

The grandmother spoke gently to him and picked his lice once
more until he fell asleep and snored.  Then she took hold of the
third golden hair and pulled it out.  The devil jumped up,
roared out, and would have treated her ill if she had not
quieted him again and said, who can help bad dreams.  What
was the dream, then, asked he, and was quite curious.  I dreamt
of a ferryman who complained that he must always ferry from
one side to the other, and was never released.  What is the
cause of it.  Ah, the fool, answered the devil, when anyone
comes and wants to go across he must put the oar in his hand,
and the other man will have
to ferry and he will be free.  As the grandmother had plucked
out the three golden hairs, and the three questions were
answered, she let the old devil alone, and he slept until
daybreak.

When the devil had gone out again the old woman took the ant
out of the folds of her dress, and gave the child of good
fortune his human shape again.  There are the three golden
hairs for you, said she.  What the devil said to your three
questions, I suppose you heard.  Yes, answered he, I heard, and
will take care to remember.  You have what you want, said she,
and now you can go your way.  He thanked the old woman for
helping him in his need, and left hell well content that
everything had turned out so fortunately.

When he came to the ferryman he was expected to give the
promised answer.  Ferry me across first, said the child of good
fortune, and then I will tell you how you can be set free, and
when he reached the opposite shore he gave him the devil's advice.
Next time anyone comes, who wants to be ferried over, just put the
oar in his hand.

He went on and came to the town wherein stood the unfruitful
tree, and there too the watchman wanted an answer.  So he
told him what he had heard from the devil.  Kill the mouse
which is gnawing at its root, and it will again bear golden
apples.  Then the watchman thanked him, and gave him as a reward
two asses laden with gold, which followed him.

Finally, he came to the town whose well was dry.  He told the
watchman what the devil had said, a toad is in the well beneath
a stone, you must find it and kill it, and the well will again
give wine in plenty.  The watchman thanked him, and also
gave him two asses laden with gold.

At last the child of good fortune got home to his wife, who
was heartily glad to see him again, and to hear how well he had
prospered in everything.  To the king he took what he had asked
for, the devil's three golden hairs, and when the king saw the
four asses laden with gold he was quite content, and said, now
all the conditions are fulfilled, and you can keep my daughter.

But tell
me, dear son-in-law, where did all that gold come from - this
is tremendous wealth.  I was rowed across a river, answered he,
and got it there, it lies on the shore instead of sand.  Can I
too fetch some of it, said the king, and he was quite eager
about it.  As much as you like, answered he.  There is a
ferryman on the river, let him ferry you over, and you can fill
your sacks on the other side.  The greedy king set out in all
haste, and when he came to the river he beckoned to the ferryman
to put him across.  The ferryman came and bade him get in,
and when they got to the other shore he put the oar in his
hand and sprang over.  But from this time forth the king had to
ferry, as a punishment for his sins.  Perhaps he is ferrying
still.  If he is, it is because no one has taken the oar from
him.
A certain miller had little by little fallen into poverty, and
had nothing left but his mill and a large apple-tree behind
it.  Once when he had gone into the forest to fetch wood, an
old man stepped up to him whom he had never seen before, and
said, why do you plague yourself with cutting wood, I will
make you rich, if you will promise me what is standing behind
your mill.  What can that be but my apple-tree, thought the
miller, and said, yes, and gave a written promise to the
stranger.  He, however, laughed mockingly and said, when three
years have passed, I will come and carry away what belongs to me,
and then he went.  When the miller got home, his wife came to
meet him and said, tell me, miller, from whence comes this
sudden wealth into our house.  All at once every box and chest
was filled, no one brought it in, and I know not how it
happened.  He answered, it comes from a stranger who met me in
the forest, and promised me great treasure.  I' in return,
have promised him what stands behind the mill - we can very
well give him the big apple-tree for it.  Ah, husband, said the
terrified wife, that must have been the devil.  He did not mean the
apple-tree, but our daughter, who was standing behind the mill
sweeping the yard.

The miller's daughter was a beautiful, pious girl, and lived
through the three years in the fear of God and without sin.  When
therefore the time was over, and the day came when the evil one
was to fetch her, she washed herself clean, and made a circle
round herself with chalk.  The devil appeared quite early, but
he could not come near to her.  Angrily, he said to the miller,
take all water away from her, that she may no longer be able to
wash herself, for otherwise I have no power over her.  The
miller was afraid, and did so.  The next morning the devil came
again, but she had wept on her hands, and they were quite
clean.  Again he could not get near her, and furiously said to
the miller, cut her hands off, or else I have no power over
her.  The miller was shocked and answered, how could I cut off my
own child's hands.  Then the evil one threatened him and said,
if you do not do it you are mine, and I will take you yourself.

The father became alarmed, and promised to obey him.  So he
went to the girl and said, my child, if I do not cut off both
your hands, the devil will carry me away, and in my terror
I have promised to do it.  Help me in my need, and forgive me
the harm I do you.  She replied, dear father, do with me what
you will, I am your child.  Thereupon she laid down both her
hands, and let them be cut off.  The devil came for the third
time, but she had wept so long and so much on the stumps, that
after all they were quite clean.  Then he had to give in, and
had lost all right over her.

The miller said to her, I have by means of you received such
great wealth that I will keep you most handsomely as long as
you live.  But she replied, here I cannot stay, I will go forth,
compassionate people will give me as much as I require.

Thereupon she caused her maimed arms to be bound to her back,
and by sunrise she set out on her way, and walked the whole day
until night fell.  Then she came to a royal garden, and by
the shimmering of the moon she saw that trees covered with
beautiful fruits grew in
it, but she could not enter, for it was surrounded by water.
And as she had walked the whole day and not eaten one mouthful,
and hunger tormented her, she thought, ah, if I were but inside,
that I might eat of the fruit, else must I die of hunger.  Then
she knelt down, called on God the Lord, and prayed.  And
suddenly an angel came towards her, who made a dam in the water,
so that the moat became dry and she could walk through it.  And
now she went into the garden and the angel went with her.  She
saw a tree covered with beautiful pears, but they were all
counted.  Then she went to them, and to still her hunger, ate
one with her mouth from the tree, but no more.  The gardener
was watching, but as the angel was standing by, he was afraid
and thought the maiden was a spirit, and was silent, neither
did he dare to cry out, or to speak to the spirit.  When she had
eaten the pear, she was satisfied, and went and concealed herself
among the bushes.  The king to whom the garden belonged, came
down to it next morning, and counted, and saw that one of the
pears was missing, and asked the gardener what had become of it,
as it was not lying beneath the tree, but was gone.  Then
answered the gardener, last night, a spirit came in, who had no
hands, and ate off one of the pears with its mouth.  The king
said, how did the spirit get over the water, and where did it go
after it had eaten the pear.  The gardener answered, someone
came in a snow-white garment from heaven who made a dam, and
kept back the water, that the spirit might walk through the moat.
And as it must have been an angel, I was afraid, and asked
no questions, and did not cry out.  When the spirit had eaten
the pear, it went back again.  The king said, if it be as you
say, I will watch with you to-night.

When it grew dark the king came into the garden and brought
a priest with him, who was to speak to the spirit.  All three
seated themselves beneath the tree and watched.  At midnight the
maiden came creeping out of the thicket, went to the tree, and
again ate one pear off it with her mouth, and beside her stood
the angel in white garments.  Then the priest went out to them
and said, "Do you come from heaven or from earth?  Are you a
spirit, or a human
being?"  She replied, "I am no spirit, but an unhappy mortal
deserted by all but God."  The king said, "If you are forsaken
by all the world, yet will I not forsake you."  He took her with
him into his royal palace, and as she was so beautiful and good,
he loved her with all his heart, had silver hands made for her,
and took her to wife.

After a year the king had to go on a journey, so he commended
his young queen to the care of his mother and said, if she
is brought to child-bed take care of her, nurse her well,
and tell me of it at once in a letter.  Then she gave birth to
a fine boy.  So the old mother made haste to write and announce
the joyful news to him.  But the messenger rested by a brook
on the way, and as he was fatigued by the great distance, he
fell asleep.  Then came the devil, who was always seeking to
injure the good queen, and exchanged the letter for another, in
which was written that the queen had brought a monster into
the world.  When the king read the letter he was shocked and
much troubled, but he wrote in answer that they were to take
great care of the queen and nurse her well until his arrival.

The messenger went back with the letter, but rested at the
same place and again fell asleep.  Then came the devil
once more, and put a different letter in his pocket, in which
it was written that they were to put the queen and her child to
death.  The old mother was terribly shocked when she received
the letter, and could not believe it.  She wrote back again to
the king, but received no other answer, because each time the
devil substituted a false letter, and in the last letter it was
also written that she was to preserve the queen's tongue and
eyes as a token that she had obeyed.

But the old mother wept to think such innocent blood was to
be shed, and had a hind brought by night and cut out her tongue
and eyes, and kept them.  Then said she to the queen, "I cannot
have you killed as the king commands, but here you may stay
no longer.  Go forth into the wide world with your child, and
never come here again."  The poor woman tied her child on her back,
and went away with eyes full of tears.  She came into a great wild
forest, and then she fell on her knees and prayed to God, and the
angel of the Lord appeared to her and led her to a little house
on which was a sign with the words, here all dwell free.  A
snow-white maiden came out of the little house and said, welcome,
lady queen, and conducted her inside.  Then she unbound the
little boy from her back, and held him to her breast that he might
feed, and laid him in a beautifully-made little bed.  Then
said the poor woman, "From whence do you know that I was a queen?"

The white maiden answered, "I am an angel sent by God, to watch
over you and your child."  The queen stayed seven years in the
little house, and was well cared for, and by God's grace, because
of her piety, her hands which had been cut off, grew once more.

At last the king came home again from his journey, and his first
wish was to see his wife and the child.  Then his aged mother
began to weep and said, "You wicked man, why did you write to me
that I was to take those two innocent lives," and she showed him
the two letters which the evil one had forged, and then
continued, "I did as you bade me, and she showed the tokens, the
tongue and eyes."  Then the king began to weep for his poor wife
and his little son so much more bitterly than she was doing,
that the aged mother had compassion on him and said, "be at peace,
she still lives, I secretly caused a hind to be killed, and
took these tokens from it, but I bound the child to your wife's
back and bade her go forth into the wide world, and made her
promise never to come back here again, because you were so
angry with her."  Then spoke the king, "I will go as far as
the sky is blue, and will neither eat nor drink until I have
found again my dear wife and my child, if in the meantime they
have not been killed, or died of hunger."

Thereupon the king traveled about for seven long years, and
sought her in every cleft of the rocks and in every cave, but
he found her not, and thought she had died of want.  During the
whole time he neither ate nor drank, but God supported him.  At
length he came into a great forest, and found therein the little
house whose sign was, here all dwell free.  Then forth came
the white maiden, took him by the hand, led him in, and said,
"Welcome, lord king," and asked him from whence he came.  He
answered, "Soon shall I have traveled about for the space of
seven years, and I seek my wife and her child, but cannot find
them."  The angel offered him meat and drink, but he did not
take anything, and only wished to rest a little.  Then he lay
down to sleep, and laid a handkerchief over his face.

Thereupon the angel went into the chamber where the queen
sat with her son, whom she usually called Sorrowful, and
said to her, go out with your child, your husband has come.  So
she went to the place where he lay, and the handkerchief
fell from his face.  Then said she, "Sorrowful, pick up your
father's handkerchief, and cover his face again."  The child picked
it up, and put it over his face again.  The king in his sleep
heard what passed, and had pleasure in letting the handkerchief
fall once more.  But the child grew impatient, and said,
"Dear mother, how can I cover my father's face when I have no
father in this world.  I have learnt to say the prayer - Our
Father, which art in heaven - you have told me that my father
was in heaven, and was the good God, and how can I know a wild
man like this.  He is not my father."  When the king heard that,
he got up, and asked who they were.  Then said
she, "I am your wife, and that is your son, Sorrowful".  And he
saw her living hands, and said, "My wife had silver hands."  She
answered, "The good God has caused my natural hands to grow again,"
and the angel went into the inner room, and brought the silver
hands, and showed them to him.  Hereupon he knew for a certainty
that it was his dear wife and his dear child, and he kissed
them, and was glad, and said, "A heavy stone has fallen from off
my heart."  Then the angel of God ate with them once again, and
after that they went home to the king's aged mother.  There were
great rejoicings everywhere, and the king and queen were married
again, and lived contentedly to their happy end.
The mother of Hans said, whither away, Hans.  Hans answered, to
Gretel.  Behave well, Hans.  Oh, I'll behave well.  Good-bye,
mother.  Good-bye, Hans.  Hans comes to Gretel.  Good day, Gretel.
Good day, Hans.  What do you bring that is good.  I bring nothing,
I want to have something given me.  Gretel presents Hans with a
needle.  Hans says, good-bye, Gretel.  Good-bye, Hans.
Hans takes the needle, sticks it into a hay-cart, and follows the
cart home.  Good evening, mother.  Good evening, Hans.  Where have
you been.  With Gretel.  What did you take her.  Took her nothing,
had something given me.  What did Gretel give you.  Gave me a
needle.  Where is the needle, Hans.  Stuck it in the hay-cart.
That was ill done, Hans.  You should have stuck the needle in
your sleeve.  Never mind, I'll do better next time.

Whither away, Hans.  To Gretel, mother.  Behave well, Hans.
Oh, I'll behave well.  Good-bye, mother.  Good-bye, Hans.  Hans
comes to Gretel.  Good day, Gretel.  Good day, Hans.  What do you
bring that is good.  I bring nothing, I want to have something
given to me.  Gretel presents Hans with a knife.  Good-bye, Gretel.
Good-bye Hans.  Hans takes the knife, sticks it in his sleeve, and
goes home.  Good evening, mother.  Good evening, Hans.  Where
have you been.  With Gretel.  What did you take her.  Took her
nothing, she gave me something.  What did Gretel give you.  Gave
me a knife.  Where is the knife, Hans.  Stuck in my sleeve.
That's ill done, Hans, you should have put the knife in your
pocket.  Never mind, will do better next time.

Whither away, Hans.  To Gretel, mother.  Behave well, Hans.
Oh, I'll behave well.  Good-bye, mother.  Good-bye, Hans.  Hans
comes to Gretel.  Good day, Gretel.  Good day, Hans.  What good
thing do you bring.  I bring nothing, I want something given me.
Gretel presents Hans with a young goat.  Good-bye, Gretel.
Good-bye, Hans.  Hans takes the goat, ties its legs, and puts it
in his pocket.  When he gets home it is suffocated.  Good evening,
mother.  Good evening, Hans.  Where have you been.  With Gretel.
What did you take her.  Took nothing, she gave me something.  What
did Gretel give you.  She gave me a goat.  Where is the goat, Hans.
Put it in my pocket.  That was ill done, Hans, you should have
put a rope round the goat's neck.  Never mind, will do better next
time.

Whither away, Hans,  to Gretel, mother.  Behave well, Hans.
Oh, I'll behave well good-bye, mother.  Good-bye, Hans.  Hans
comes to Gretel.  Good day, Gretel.  Good day, Hans.  What good
thing do you bring.  I bring nothing, I want something given to
me.  Gretel presents Hans with a piece of bacon.  Good-bye,
Gretel.  Good-bye, Hans.
Hans takes the bacon, ties it to a rope, and drags it away
behind him.  The dogs come and devour the bacon.  When he gets
home, he has the rope in his hand, and there is no longer
anything hanging to it.  Good evening, mother.  Good evening,
Hans.  Where have you been.  With Gretel.  What did you take
her.  I took her nothing, she gave me something.  What did
Gretel give you.
Gave me a bit of bacon.  Where is the bacon, Hans.  I tied it to
a rope, brought it home, dogs took it.  That was ill done, Hans,
you should have carried the bacon on your head.  Never mind, will
do better next time.

Whither away, Hans.  To Gretel, mother.  Behave well, Hans.
I'll behave well.  Good-bye, mother.  Good-bye, Hans.  Hans
comes to Gretel.  Good day, Gretel.  Good day, Hans.  What good
thing do you bring.  I bring nothing, but would have something
given.  Gretel presents Hans with a calf.  Good-bye, Gretel.
Good-bye, Hans.
Hans takes the calf, puts it on his head, and the calf kicks his
face.  Good evening, mother.  Good evening, Hans.  Where have you
been.  With Gretel.  What did you take her.  I took nothing, but
had something given me.  What did Gretel give you.  A calf.
Where have you the calf, Hans.  I set it on my head and it
kicked my face.  That was ill done, Hans, you should have led
the calf, and put it in the stall.  Never mind, will do better
next time.

Whither away, Hans.  To Gretel, mother.  Behave well, Hans.
I'll behave well.  Good-bye, mother.  Good-bye, Hans.
Hans comes to Gretel.  Good day, Gretel.  Good day, Hans.  What
good thing do you bring.  I bring nothing, but would have
something given.  Gretel says to Hans, I will go with you.
Hans takes Gretel, ties her to a rope, leads her to the rack and
binds her fast.  Then Hans goes to his mother.  Good evening,
mother.  Good evening, Hans.  Where have you been.  With Gretel.
What did you take her.  I took her nothing.  What did Gretel
give you.  She gave me nothing, she came with me.  Where have
you left Gretel.  I led her by the rope, tied her to the rack,
and scattered some grass for her.  That was ill done, Hans, you
should have cast friendly eyes on her.  Never mind, will do better.

Hans went into the stable, cut out all the calves, and sheep's eyes,
and threw them in Gretel's face.  Then Gretel became angry, tore
herself loose and ran away, and was no longer the bride of Hans.
An aged count once lived in switzerland, who had an only son,
but he was stupid, and could learn nothing.  Then said the
father, hark you, my son, try as I will I can get nothing into
your head.  You must go from hence, I will give you into the
care of a celebrated master, who shall see what he can do
with you.  The youth was sent into a strange town, and remained a
whole year with the master.  At the end of this time, he came
home again, and his father asked, now, my son, what have you
learnt.  Father, I have learnt what the dogs say when they bark.

Lord have mercy on us, cried the father, is that all you have
learnt.  I will send you into another town, to another master.
The youth was taken thither, and stayed a year with this master
likewise.  When he came back the father again asked, my son,
what have you learnt.  He answered, father, I have learnt what
the birds say.  Then the father fell into a rage and said, oh,
you lost man, you have spent the precious time and learnt nothing,
are you not ashamed to appear before my eyes.  I will send you
to a third master, but if you learn nothing this time also,
I will no longer be your father.  The youth remained a whole year
with the third master also, and when he came home again, and
his father inquired, my son, what have you learnt.  He
answered, dear father, I have this year learnt what the frogs
croak.  Then the father fell into the most furious anger, sprang
up, called his people thither, and said, this man is no longer
my son, I drive him forth, and command you to take him out into
the forest, and kill him.  They took him forth, but when they
should have killed him, they could not do it for pity, and
let him go, and they cut the eyes and the tongue out of a deer
that they might carry them to the old man as a token.

The youth wandered on, and after some time came to a fortress
where he begged for a night's lodging.  Yes, said the lord of
the castle, if you will pass the night down there in the old
tower, go thither, but I warn you, it is at the peril of your
life, for it is full of wild dogs, which bark and howl without
stopping, and at certain hours a man has to be given to them,
whom they at once devour.  The whole district was in sorrow
and dismay because of them, and yet no one could do anything
to stop this.  The youth, however, was without fear, and said,
just let me go down to the barking dogs, and give me something
that I can throw to them, they will do nothing to harm me.

As he himself would have it so, they gave him some food for
the wild animals, and led him down to the tower.  When he went
inside, the dogs did not bark at him, but wagged their tails
quite amicably around him, ate what he set before them, and did
not hurt one hair of his head.  Next morning, to the astonishment
of everyone, he came out again safe and unharmed, and said
to the lord of the castle, the dogs have revealed to me, in
their own language, why they dwell there, and bring evil on
the land.  They are bewitched, and are obliged to watch over a
great treasure which is below in the tower, and they can
have no rest until it is taken away, and I have likewise learnt,
from their discourse, how that is to be done.  Then all who
heard this rejoiced, and the lord of the castle said he would
adopt him as a son if he accomplished it successfully.  He
went down again, and as he knew what he had to do, he did it
thoroughly, and brought a chest full of gold out with him.

The howling of the wild dogs was henceforth heard no more, they
had disappeared, and the country was freed from the trouble.
After some time he took it into his head that he would travel to
Rome. On the way he passed by a marsh, in which a number of
frogs were sitting croaking.  He listened to them, and when he
became aware of what they were saying, he grew very thoughtful
and sad.  At last he arrived in Rome, where the Pope had just died,
and there was great doubt among the cardinals as to whom they
should appoint as his successor.  They at length agreed that
the person should be chosen as Pope who should be distinguished
by some divine and miraculous token.  And just as that was decided
on, the young count entered into the church, and suddenly two
snow-white doves flew on his shoulders and remained sitting
there.  The ecclesiastics recognized therein the token from above,
and asked him on the spot if he would be Pope.  He was undecided,
and knew not if he were worthy of this, but the doves counselled
him to do it, and at length he said yes.  Then was he anointed and
consecrated, and thus was fulfilled what he had heard from the
frogs on his way, which had so affected him, that he was to be
his holiness the Pope.  Then he had to sing a mass, and did not
know one word of it, but the two doves sat continually on his
shoulders, and said it all in his ear.
There was once a man who had a daughter who was called clever
elsie.  And when she had grown up her father said, we will get
her married.  Yes, said the mother, if only someone would come who
would have her.  At length a man came from a distance and wooed
her, who was called Hans, but he stipulated that clever elsie
should be really smart.  Oh, said the father, she has plenty of
good sense.  And the mother said, oh, she can see the wind coming
up the street, and hear the flies coughing.

Well, said Hans, if she is not really smart, I won't have her.
When they were sitting at dinner and had eaten, the mother said,
elsie, go into the cellar and fetch some beer.  Then clever elsie
took the pitcher from the wall, went into the cellar, and tapped
the lid briskly as she went, so that the time might not appear
long.  When she was below she fetched herself a chair, and set
it before the barrel so that she had no need to stoop, and did
not hurt her back or do herself any unexpected injury.  Then she
placed the can before her, and turned the tap, and while the
beer was running she would not let her eyes be idle, but looked
up at the wall, and after much peering here and there, saw a
pick-axe exactly above her, which the masons had accidentally
left there.

Then clever elsie began to weep, and said, if I get Hans, and we
have a child, and he grows big, and we send him into the cellar
here to draw beer, then the pick-axe will fall on his head and
kill him.  Then she sat and wept and screamed with all the strength
of her body, over the misfortune which lay before her.  Those
upstairs waited for the drink, but clever elsie still did not
come.  Then the woman said to the servant, just go down into the
cellar and see where elsie is.  The maid went and found her
sitting in front of the barrel, screaming loudly.  Elsie, why do
you weep, asked the maid.  Ah, she answered, have I not reason
to weep.  If I get Hans, and we have a child, and he grows big,
and has to draw beer here, the pick-axe will perhaps fall on his
head, and kill him.  Then said the maid, what a clever elsie we
have.  And sat down beside her and began loudly to weep over the
misfortune.  After a while, as the maid did not come back, those
upstairs were thirsty for the beer, the man said to the boy, just
go down into the cellar and see where elsie and the girl are.

The boy went down, and there sat clever elsie and the girl both
weeping together.  Then he asked, why are you weeping,  ah, said
elsie, have I not reason to weep.  If I get Hans, and we have a
child, and he grows big, and has to draw beer here, the pick-axe
will fall on his head and kill him.  Then said the boy, what a
clever elsie we have.  And sat down by her, and likewise began
to howl loudly.  Upstairs they
waited for the boy, but as he still did not return, the man said
to the woman, just go down into the cellar and see where elsie is.

The woman went down, and found all three in the midst of their
lamentations, and inquired what was the cause, then elsie told
her also that her future child was to be killed by the pick-axe,
when it grew big and had to draw beer, and the pick-axe fell
down.  Then said the mother likewise, what a clever elsie we have.
And sat down and wept with them.  The man upstairs waited a short
time, but as his wife did not come back and his thirst grew ever
greater, he said, I must go into the cellar myself and see where
elsie is.  But when he got into the cellar, and they were all
sitting together crying, and he heard the reason, and that elsie's
child was the cause, and that elsie might perhaps bring one into
the world some day, and that he might be killed by the
pick-axe, if he should happen to be sitting beneath it, drawing
beer just at the very time when it fell down, he cried, oh,
what a clever elsie.  And sat down, and likewise wept with them.

The bridegroom stayed upstairs alone for a long time, then as
no one would come back he thought, they must be waiting for me
below, I too must go there and see what they are about.  When he
got down, the five of them were sitting screaming and lamenting
quite piteously, each out-doing the other.  What misfortune has
happened then, he asked.  Ah, dear Hans, said elsie, if we marry
each other and have a child, and he is big, and we perhaps send
him here to draw something to drink, then the pick-axe which has
been left up there might dash his brains out if it were to fall
down, so have we not reason to weep.  Come, said Hans, more
understanding than that is not needed for my household, as you
are such a clever elsie, I will have you.  And he seized her
hand, took her upstairs with him, and married her.

After Hans had had her some time, he said, wife, I am going
out to work and earn some money for us, go into the field and cut
the corn that we may have some bread.  Yes, dear Hans, I will do
that.  After Hans had gone away, she cooked herself some good
broth and took it into the field with her.  When she came to the
field she said to herself, what shall I do, shall I cut first, or
shall I eat first.  Oh, I will eat first.  Then she drank her cup
of broth, and when she was fully satisfied, she once more said,
what shall I do.  Shall I cut first, or shall I sleep first.  I
will sleep first.  Then she lay down among the corn and fell
asleep.  Hans had been at home for a long time, but elsie did not
come, then said he, what a clever elsie I have, she is so
industrious that she does not even come home to eat.  But when
evening came and she still stayed away, Hans went out to see what
she had cut, but nothing was cut, and she was lying among the
corn asleep.  Then Hans hastened home and brought a fowler's net
with little bells and hung it round about her, and she still
went on sleeping.  Then he ran home, shut the house-door, and sat
down in his chair and worked.  At length, when it was quite dark,
clever elsie awoke and when she got up there was a jingling all
round about her, and the bells rang at each step which she took.
Then she was alarmed, and became uncertain whether she really was
clever elsie or not, and said, is it I, or is it not I.  But she
knew not what answer to make to this, and stood for a time in
doubt, at length she thought, I will go home and ask if it be I,
or if it be not I, they will be sure to know.  She ran to the door
of her own house, but it was shut, then she knocked at the
window and cried, Hans, is elsie within.  Yes, answered Hans, she
is within.  Hereupon she was terrified, and said, ah, heavens.
Then it is not I.  And went to another door, but when the people
heard the jingling of the bells they would not open it, and she
could get in nowhere.  Then she ran out of the village, and no
one has seen her since.
There was once upon a time a tailor who had three sons, and
only one goat.  But as the goat supported all of them with
her milk, she was obliged to have good food, and to be taken
every day to pasture.  The sons did this, in turn.  Once the eldest
took her to the churchyard, where the finest herbs were to be found,
and let her eat and run about there.  At night when it was time to
go home he asked, goat, have you had enough.  The goat answered
     I have eaten so much,
     not a leaf more I'll touch, meh. Meh.

Come home, then, said the youth, and took hold of the cord
round her neck, led her into the stable and tied her up securely.
Well, said the old tailor, has the goat had as much food as she
ought.  Oh, answered the son, she has eaten so much, not a
leaf more she'll touch.  But the father wished to satisfy himself,
and went down to the stable, stroked the dear animal and asked,
goat, are you satisfied.  The goat answered,
     how should I be satisfied.
     Among the ditches I leapt about,
     found no leaf, so went without, meh. Meh.

What do I hear, cried the tailor, and ran upstairs and said to the
youth.  HI, you liar, you said the goat had had enough, and have
let her hunger, and in his anger he took the yard-measure from
the wall, and drove him out with blows.

Next day it was the turn of the second son, who sought a place
in the fence of the garden, where nothing but good herbs grew, and
the goat gobbled them all up.  At night when he wanted to go home,
he asked, goat, are you satisfied.  The goat answered,
     I have eaten so much,
     not a leaf more I'll touch, meh. Meh.

Come home, then, said the youth, and led her home, and tied her
up in the stable.  Well, said the old tailor, has the goat had as
much food as she ought.  Oh, answered the son, she has eaten
so much, not a leaf more she'll touch.  The tailor would not rely
on this, but went down to the stable and said, goat, have you had
enough.  The goat answered,
     how should I be satisfied.
     Among the ditches I leapt about,
     found no leaf, so went without, meh. Meh.

The godless wretch. Cried the tailor, to let such a good animal
hunger, and he ran up and drove the youth out of doors with the
yard-measure.

Now came the turn of the third son, who wanted to do his duty
well, and sought out some bushes with the finest leaves, and let the
goat devour them.  In the evening when he wanted to go home, he
asked, goat, have you had enough.  The goat answered,
     I have eaten so much,
     not a leaf more I'll touch, meh. Meh.

Come home, then, said the youth, and led her into the stable, and
tied her up.  Well, said the old tailor, has the goat had her full
share of food.  She has eaten so much, not a leaf more she'll
touch.  The tailor was distrustful, went down and asked, goat,
have you had enough.  The wicked beast answered,
     how should I be satisfied.
     Among the ditches I leapt about,
     found no leaf, so went without, meh. Meh.

Oh, the brood of liars, cried the tailor, each as wicked and
forgetful of his duty as the other.  You shall no longer make a
fool of me, and quite beside himself with anger, he ran upstairs
and belabored the poor young fellow so vigorously with the
yard-measure that he sprang out of the house.

The old tailor was now alone with his goat.  Next morning he
went down into the stable, stroked the goat and said, come, my
dear little animal, I myself will take you to feed.  He took her
by the rope and conducted her to green hedges, and amongst milfoil
and whatever else goats like to eat.  There you may for once eat to
your heart's content, said he to her, and let her browse till
evening.  Then he asked, goat, are you satisfied.  She replied.
     I have eaten so much,
     not a leaf more I'll touch, meh. Meh.

Come home, then, said the tailor, and led her into the stable, and
tied her fast.  When he was going away, he turned round again and
said, well, are you satisfied for once.  But the goat behaved no
better to him, and cried,
     how should I be satisfied.
     Among the ditches I leapt about,
     found no leaf, so went without, meh. Meh.

When the tailor heard that, he was shocked, and saw clearly that
he had driven away his three sons without cause.  Wait, you
ungrateful creature, cried he, it is not enough to drive you forth,
I will brand you so that you will no more dare to show yourself
amongst honest tailors.  In great haste he ran upstairs, fetched his
razor, lathered the goat's head, and shaved her as clean as the palm
of his hand.  And as the yard-measure would have been too good for
her, he brought the horsewhip, and gave her such cuts with it that
she bounded away with tremendous leaps.

When the tailor was thus left quite alone in his house he fell into
great grief, and would gladly have had his sons back again, but no
one knew whither they were gone.  The eldest had apprenticed
himself to a joiner, and learnt industriously and indefatigably,
and when the time came for him to go traveling, his master presented
him with a little table which was not particularly beautiful, and
was made of common wood, but which had one good property.  If
anyone set it out, and said, little table, spread yourself, the good
little table was at once covered with a clean little cloth, and a
plate was there, and a knife and fork beside it, and dishes with
boiled meats and roasted meats, as many as there was room for, and a
great glass of red wine shone so that it made the heart glad.  The
young journeyman thought, with this you have enough for your
whole life, and went joyously about the world and never troubled
himself at all whether an inn was good or bad, or if anything was
to be found in it or not.  When it suited him he did not enter an
inn at all, but either on the plain, in a wood, a meadow, or
wherever he fancied, he took his little table off his back, set it
down before him, and said, spread yourself, and then everything
appeared that his heart desired.  At length he took it into his head
to go back to his father, whose anger would now be appeased, and
who would now willingly receive him with his magic table.  It came
to pass that on his way home, he came one evening to an inn which
was filled with guests.  They bade him welcome, and invited him to
sit and eat with them, for otherwise he would have difficulty in
getting anything.  No, answered the joiner, I will not take the few
morsels out of
your mouths.  Rather than that, you shall be my guests.  They
laughed, and thought he was jesting with them.  He but placed his
wooden table in the middle of the room, and said, little table,
spread yourself.  Instantly it was covered with food, so good that
the host could never have procured it, and the smell of it
ascended pleasantly to the nostrils of the guests.  Fall to, dear
friends, said the joiner, and the guests when they saw that he
meant it, did not need to be asked twice, but drew near, pulled out
their knives and attacked it valiantly.  And what surprised them the
most was that when a dish became empty, a full one instantly took
its place of its own accord.  The innkeeper stood in one corner and
watched the affair.  He did not at all know what to say, but
thought, you could easily find a use for such a cook as that in your
household.  The joiner and his comrades made merry until late
into the night.  At length they lay down to sleep, and the young
apprentice also went to bed, and set his magic table against the
wall.  The host's thoughts, however, let him have no rest.  It
occurred to him that there was a little old table in his lumber-room
which looked just like the apprentice's and he brought it out,
and carefully exchanged it for the wishing table.  Next morning
the joiner paid for his bed, took up his table, never thinking
that he had got a false one, and went his way.  At mid-day he
reached his father, who received him with great joy.  Well, my dear
son, what have you learnt.  Said he to him.  Father, I have become
a joiner.

A good trade, replied the old man, but what have you brought
back with you from your apprenticeship.  Father, the best thing
which I have brought back with me is this little table.  The
tailor inspected it on all sides and said, you did not make a
masterpiece when you made that.  It is a bad old table.  But it
is a table which furnishes itself, replied the son.  When I set it
out, and tell it to spread itself, the most beautiful dishes stand
on it, and a wine also, which gladdens the heart.  Just invite all
our relations and friends, they shall refresh and enjoy themselves
for once, for the table will give them all they require.  When the
company was assembled, he put his table in the middle of the room and
said, little table,
spread yourself, but the little table did not bestir itself, and
remained just as bare as any other table which does not understand
language.  Then the poor apprentice became aware that his table
had been changed, and was ashamed at having to stand there like a
liar.  The relations, however, mocked him, and were forced to go
home without having eaten or drunk.  The father brought out his
patches again, and went on tailoring, but the son went to a
master in the craft.

The second son had gone to a miller and had apprenticed himself
to him.  When his years were over, the master said, as you
have conducted yourself so well, I give you an ass of a peculiar
kind, which neither draws a cart nor carries a sack.  What good is
he, then. Asked the young apprentice.  He spews forth gold, answered
the miller.  If you set him on a cloth and say bricklebrit,
the good animal will spew forth gold pieces for you from back and
front.  That is a fine thing, said the apprentice, and thanked the
master, and went out into the world.  When he had need of gold,
he had only to say bricklebrit to his ass, and it rained gold
pieces, and he had nothing to do but pick them off the ground.
Wheresoever he went, the best of everything was good enough for
him, and the dearer the better, for he had always a full purse.
When he had looked about the world for some time, he thought, you
must seek out your father.  If you go to him with the gold-ass he
will forget his anger, and receive you well.  It came to pass
that he came to the same inn in which his brother's table had been
exchanged.  He led his ass by the bridle, and the host was about
to take the animal from him and tie him up, but the young
apprentice said, don't trouble yourself, I will take my grey
horse into the stable, and tie him up myself too, for I must know
where he stands.  This struck the host as odd, and he thought
that a man who was forced to look after his ass himself, could not
have much to spend.  But when the stranger put his hand in his
pocket and brought out two gold pieces, and said he was to
provide something good for him, the host opened his eyes wide, and
ran and sought out the best he could muster.  After dinner the
guest asked what he owed.  The host did
not see why he should not double the reckoning, and said the
apprentice must give two more gold pieces.  He felt in his pocket,
but his gold was just at an end.  Wait an instant, sir host, said
he, I will go and fetch some money.  But he took the table-cloth
with him.  The host could not imagine what this could mean, and
being curious, stole after him, and as the guest bolted the stable
door, he peeped through a hole left by a knot in the wood.  The
stranger spread out the cloth under the animal and cried,
bricklebrit, and immediately the beast began to let gold pieces fall
from back and front, so that it fairly rained down money on the
ground.  Eh, my word, said the host, ducats are quickly coined
there.  A purse like that is not to be sniffed at.  The guest
paid his score, and went to bed, but in the night the host stole
down into the stable, led away the master of the mint, and tied up
another ass in his place.

Early next morning the apprentice traveled away with his ass,
and thought that he had his gold-ass.  At mid-day he reached his
father, who rejoiced to see him again, and gladly took him in.
What have you made of yourself, my son.  Asked the old man.
A miller, dear father, he answered.  What have you brought back
with you from your travels.  Nothing else but an ass.  There are
asses enough here, said the father, I would rather have had a good
goat.  Yes, replied the son, but it is no common ass, but a
gold-ass, when I say bricklebrit, the good beast spews forth a whole
sheetful of gold pieces.  Just summon all our relations hither,
and I will make them rich folks.  That suits me well, said the
tailor, for then I shall have no need to torment myself any longer
with the needle, and ran out himself and called the relations
together.  As soon as they were assembled, the miller bade them
make way, spread out his cloth, and brought the ass into the room.
Now watch, said he, and cried, bricklebrit, but what fell were not
gold pieces, and it was clear that the animal knew nothing of the
art, for every ass does not attain such perfection.  Then the poor
miller pulled a long face, saw that he was betrayed, and begged
pardon of the relatives, who went home as poor as they came.  There
was no help for it, the old man had to betake him to his needle once
more, and the youth hired himself to a miller.

The third brother had apprenticed himself to a turner, and as that
is skilled labor, he was the longest in learning.  His brothers,
however, told him in a letter how badly things had gone with them,
and how the innkeeper had cheated them of ther beautiful
wishing-gifts on the last evening before they reached home.  When
the turner had served his time, and had to set out on his travels,
as he had conducted himself so well, his master presented him with a
sack and said, there is a cudgel in it.  I can put on the sack, said
he, and it may be of good service to me, but why should the cudgel
be in it.  It only makes it heavy.  I will tell you why, replied
the master.  If anyone has done anything to injure you, do but say,
out of the sack, cudgel. And the cudgel will leap forth among the
people, and play such a dance on their backs that they will not be
able to stir or move for a week, and it will not leave off until
you say, into the sack, cudgel.  The apprentice thanked him, and
put the sack on his back, and when anyone came too near him, and
wished to attack him, he said, out of the sack, cudgel, and
instantly the cudgel sprang out, and dusted the coat or jacket of
one after the other on their backs, and never stopped until it had
stripped it off them, and it was done so quickly, that before anyone
was aware, it was already his own turn.  In the evening the
young turner reached the inn where his brothers had been cheated.

He laid his sack on the table before him, and began to talk of all
the wonderful things which he had seen in the world.  Yes, said
he, people may easily find a table which will spread itself, a
gold-ass, and things of that kind - extremely good things which
I by no means despise - but these are nothing in comparison with
the treasure which I have won for myself, and am carrying about
with me in my sack there.  The innkeeper pricked up his ears.
What in the world can that be.  Thought he.  The sack must be filled
with nothing but jewels.  I ought to get them cheap too, for all
good things go in threes.  When it was time for sleep, the guest
stretched himself on the bench, and laid his sack beneath him
for a pillow.  When the innkeeper thought his guest
was lying in a sound sleep, he went to him and pushed and pulled
quite gently and carefully at the sack to see if he could possibly
draw it away and lay another in its place.

The turner, however, had been waiting for this for a long time, and
now just as the inn-keeper was about to give a hearty tug, he cried,
out of the sack, cudgel.  Instantly the little cudgel came forth,
and fell on the inn-keeper and gave him a sound thrashing.
The host cried for mercy.  But the louder he cried, the harder the
cudgel beat the time on his back, until at length he fell to the
ground exhausted.  Then the turner said, if you do not give back
the table which spreads itself, and the gold-ass, the dance shall
begin afresh.  Oh, no, cried the host, quite humbly, I will gladly
produce everything, only make the accursed kobold creep back into
the sack.  Then said the apprentice, I will let mercy take the
place of justice, but beware of getting into mischief again.  So he
cried, into the sack, cudgel.  And let him have rest.

Next morning the turner went home to his father with the
wishing-table, and the gold-ass.  The tailor rejoiced when he saw
him once more, and asked him likewise what he had learned in foreign
parts.  Dear father, said he, I have become a turner.  A skilled
trade, said the father.  What have you brought back with you from
your travels.

A precious thing, dear father, replied the son, a cudgel in the
sack.

What cried the father, a cudgel.  That's certainly worth your
trouble.  From every tree you can cut yourself one.  But not one
like this, dear father.  If I say, out of the sack, cudgel, the
cudgel springs out and leads anyone ill-disposed toward me a weary
dance, and never stops until he lies on the ground and prays for
fair weather.  Look you, with this cudgel have I rescued the
wishing-table and the gold-ass which the thievish innkeeper took
away from my brothers.  Now let them both be sent for, and invite
all our kinsmen.  I will give them to eat and to drink, and will
fill their pockets with gold into the bargain.  The old tailor
had not much confidence.  Nevertheless he summoned the relatives
together.  Then the turner spread a cloth in the room and led in the
gold-ass, and said to his brother, now, dear brother, speak to him.
The miller said, bricklebrit, and instantly the gold pices rained
down on the cloth like a thunder-shower, and the ass did not stop
until every one of them had so much that he could carry no more.
 - I can see by your face that you also would have liked to be
there. -

Then the turner brought the little table, and said, now dear
brother, speak to it.  And scarcely had the carpenter said, table,
spread yourself, than it was spread and amply covered with the
most exquisite dishes.  Then such a meal took place as the good
tailor had never yet known in his house, and the whole party of
kinsmen stayed together till far in the night, and were all merry
and glad.  The tailor locked away needle and thread, yard-measure
and goose, in a closet, and lived with his three sons in joy and
splendor.

What, however, happened to the goat who was to blame for the
tailor driving out his three sons?  That I will tell you.  She
was ashamed that she had a bald head, and ran to a fox's hole and
crept into it.  When the fox came home, he was met by two great
eyes shining out of the darkness, and was terrified and ran away.
A bear met him, and as the fox looked quite disturbed, he said,
what is the matter with you, brother fox, why do you look like
that.  Ah, answered redskin, a fierce beast is in my cave and stared
at me with its fiery eyes.  We will soon drive him out, said
the bear, and went with him to the cave and looked in, but when
he saw the fiery eyes, fear seized on him likewise.  He would have
nothing to do with the furious beast, and took to his heels.  The
bee met him, and as she saw that he was ill at ease, she said,
bear, you are really pulling a very pitiful face.  What has become
of all your gaiety.  It is all very well for you to talk, replied
the bear, a furious beast with staring eyes is in redskin's house,
and we can't drive him out.  The bee said, bear I pity you, I am
a poor weak creature whom you would not turn aside to look at, but
still, I believe, I can help you.  She flew into the fox's cave,
lighted on the goat's smoothly-shorn head, and stung her so
violently, that she sprang up, crying meh, meh, and ran forth
into the world as if mad, and to this hour no one knows where she
has gone.
There was once a poor peasant who sat in the evening by the
hearth and poked the fire, and his wife sat and spun.  Then
said he, how sad it is that we have no children.  With us all
is so quiet, and in other houses it is noisy and lively.
Yes, replied the wife, and sighed, even if we had only one,
and it were quite small, and only as big as a thumb, I should be
quite satisfied, and we would still love it with all our hearts.
Now it so happened that the woman fell ill, and after seven
months gave birth to a child, that was perfect in all its limbs,
but no longer than a thumb.  Then said they, it is as we wished
it to be, and it shall be our dear child.  And because of its
size, they called it thumbling.  Though they did not let it want
for food, the child did not grow taller, but remained as it had
been at the first.  Nevertheless it looked sensibly out of its
eyes, and soon showed itself to be a wise and nimble creature,
for everything it did turned out well.

One day the peasant was getting ready to go into the forest to
cut wood, when he said as if to himself, how I wish that there
was someone who would bring the cart to me.  Oh father, cried
thumbling, I will soon bring the cart, rely on that.  It shall
be in the forest at the appointed time.  The man smiled and
said, how can that be done, you are far too small to lead the
horse by the reins.  That's of no consequence, father, if my
mother will only harness it, I shall sit in the horse's ear
and call out to him how he is to go.  Well, answered the man,
for once we will try it.

When the time came, the mother harnessed the horse, and placed
thumbling in its ear, and then the little creature cried, gee
up, gee up.

Then it went quite properly as if with its master, and the cart
went the right way into the forest.  It so happened that just
as he was turning a corner, and the little one was crying, gee
up, two strange men came towards him.  My word, said one of them,
what is this.  There is a cart coming, and a driver is calling to
the horse and still he is not to be seen.  That can't be right,
said the other, we will follow the cart and see where it stops.  The
cart, however, drove right into the forest, and exactly to the
place where the wood had been cut.  When thumbling saw his
father, he cried to him, do you see, father, here I am with the
cart, now take me down.  The father got hold of the horse with
his left hand and with the right took his little son out of the
ear.  Thumbling sat down quite merrily on a straw, but when the
two strange men
saw him, they did not know what to say for
astonishment.  Then one of them took the other aside and said,
listen, the little fellow would make our fortune if we exhibited
him in a large town, for money.  We will buy him.  They went to
the peasant and said, sell us the little man.  He shall be well
treated with us.  No, replied the father, he is the apple of my
eye, and all the money in the world cannot buy him from me.

Thumbling, however, when he heard of the bargain, had crept up
the folds of his father's coat, placed himself on his shoulder,
and whispered in his ear, father do give me away, I will soon
come back again.  Then the father parted with him to the two
men for a handsome sum of money.  Where will you sit, they
said to him.  Oh just set me on the rim of your hat, and then I
can walk backwards and forwards and look at the country, and
still not fall down.  They did as he wished, and when thumbling
had taken leave of his father, they went away with him.  They
walked until it was dusk, and then the little fellow said,
do take me down, it is necessary.  Just stay up there, said the
man on whose hat he sat, it makes no difference to me.  The birds
sometimes let things fall on me.  No, said thumbling, I
know what's manners, take me quickly down.  The man took his hat
off, and put the little fellow on the ground by the wayside, and
he leapt and crept about a little between the sods, and then he
suddenly slipped into a mousehole which he had sought out.
Good evening, gentlemen, just go home without me, he cried to
them, and mocked them.  They ran thither and stuck their sticks
into the mousehole, but it was all in vain.  Thumbling crept
still farther in, and as it soon became quite
dark, they were forced to go home with their vexation and
their empty purses.

When thumbling saw that they were gone, he crept back out of the
subterranean passage.  It is so dangerous to walk on the ground
in the dark, said he, how easily a neck or a leg is broken.
Fortunately he stumbled against an empty snail-shell.  Thank God,
said he, in that I can pass the night in safety.  And got into it.
Not long afterwards, when he was just going to sleep, he heard two
men go by, and one of them was saying, how shall we set about
getting hold of the rich pastor's silver and gold.  I could tell
you that, cried thumbling, interrupting them.  What was that, said
one of the thieves in fright, I heard someone speaking.  They stood
still listening, and thumbling spoke again, and said, take
me with you, and I'll help you.

But where are you.  Just look on the ground, and observe from
whence my voice comes, he replied.  There the thieves at length
found him, and lifted him up.  You little imp, how will you help
us, they said.  Listen, said he, I will creep into the pastor's
room through the iron bars, and will reach out to you whatever
you want to have.  Come then, they said, and we will see what you
can do.  When they got to the pastor's house, thumbling crept into
the room, but instantly cried out with all his might, do you want
to have everything that is here.  The thieves were alarmed, and
said, but do speak softly, so as not to waken any one.  Thumbling
however, behaved as if he had not understood this, and cried
again, what do you want.  Do you want to have everything that is
here.  The cook, who slept in the next room, heard this and sat up
in bed, and listened.  The thieves, however, had in their fright
run some distance away, but at last they took courage, and
thought, the little rascal wants to mock us.  They came back and
whispered to him, come be serious, and reach something out to us.
Then thumbling again cried as loudly as he could, I really will
give you everything, just put your hands in.  The maid who was
listening, heard this quite distinctly, and jumped out of bed
and rushed to the door.  The thieves took flight, and ran as if
the wild huntsman
were behind them, but as the maid could not see
anything, she went to strike a light.  When she came to the
place with it, thumbling, unperceived, betook himself to the
granary, and the maid after she had examined every corner and
found nothing, lay down in her bed again, and believed that,
after all, she had only been dreaming with open eyes and ears.
Thumbling had climbed up among the hay and found a beautiful
place to sleep in.  There he intended to rest until day, and
then go home again to his parents.  But there were other things in
store for him.  Truly, there is much worry and affliction in
this world.  When the day dawned, the maid arose from her bed to
feed the cows.  Her first walk was into the barn, where she laid
hold of an armful of hay, and precisely that very one in which
poor thumbling was lying asleep.  He, however, was sleeping so
soundly that he was aware of nothing, and did not awake until he
was in the mouth of the cow, who had picked him up with the hay.

Ah, heavens, cried he, how have I got into the fulling mill.  But
he soon discovered where he was. Then he had to take care not to
let himself go between the teeth and be dismembered, but he was
subsequently forced to slip down into the stomach with the hay.
In this little room the windows are forgotten, said he, and no
sun shines in, neither will a candle be brought.  His quarters
were especially unpleasing to him, and the worst was that more
and more hay was always coming in by the door, and the space grew
less and less.  When at length in his anguish, he cried as
loud as he could, bring me no more fodder, bring me no more
fodder.  The maid was just milking the cow, and when she heard
some one speaking, and saw no one, and perceived that it was the
same voice that she had heard in the night, she was so
terrified that she slipped off her stool, and spilt the milk.

She ran in great haste to her master, and said, oh heavens,
pastor, the cow has been speaking.  You are mad, replied the
pastor, but he went himself to the byre to see what was there.
Hardly, however had he set his foot inside when thumbling again
cried, bring me no more fodder, bring me no more fodder.  Then
the pastor himself was alarmed, and thought that an evil
spirit had gone into the cow, and ordered her to be killed.  She was
killed, but the stomach, in which thumbling was, was thrown on
the dunghill.  Thumbling had great difficulty in working his
way out.  However, he succeeded so far as to get some room, but
just as he was going to thrust his head out, a new misfortune
occurred.  A hungry wolf ran thither, and swallowed the whole
stomach at one gulp.  Thumbling did not lose courage.  Perhaps,
thought he, the wolf will listen to what I have got to say.  And
he called to him from out of his belly, dear wolf, I know of a
magnificent feast for you.

Where is it to be had, said the wolf.
In such and such a house.  You must creep into it through the
kitchen-sink, and will find cakes, and bacon, and sausages, and
as much of them as you can eat.  And he described to him exactly
his father's house.  The wolf did not require to be told this
twice, squeezed himself in at night through the sink, and ate to
his heart's content in the larder.  When he had eaten his fill,
he wanted to go out again, but he had become so big that he could
not go out by the same way.  Thumbling had reckoned on this, and
now began to make a violent noise in the wolf's body, and raged
and screamed as loudly as he could.  Will you be quiet, said the
wolf, you will waken up the people.  What do I care, replied the
little fellow, you have eaten your fill, and I will make merry
likewise.  And began once more to scream with all his strength.

At last his father and mother were aroused by it, and ran to the
room and looked in through the opening in the door.  When they
saw that a wolf was inside, they ran away, and teh husband
fetched his axe, and the wife the scythe.  Stay behind, said the
man, when they entered the room.  When I have given the blow, if
he is not killed by it, you must cut him down and hew his body
to pieces.  Then thumbling heard his parents, voices and cried,
dear father, I am here, I am in the wolf's body.  Said the father,
full of joy, thank God, our dear child has found us again. And
bade the
woman take away her scythe, that thumbling might not be hurt
with it.  After that he raised his arm, and struck the wolf
such a blow on his head that he fell down
dead, and then they got knives and scissors and cut his body open
and drew the little fellow forth.

Ah, said the father, what sorrow we have gone through for your
sake.  Yes father, I have gone about the world a great deal.
Thank heaven, I breathe fresh air again.  Where have you been,
then.  Ah, father, I have been in a mouse's hole, in a cow's
belly, and then in a wolf's paunch.  Now I will stay with you.
And we will not sell you again, no not for all the riches in
the world, said his parents, and they embraced and kissed their
dear thumbling.  They gave him to eat and to drink, and had
some new clothes made for him, for his own had been spoiled
on his journey.
There was once a poor servant-girl who was industrious and cleanly
and swept the house every day, and emptied her sweepings on the
great heap in front of the door.  One morning when she was just
going back to her work, she found a letter on this heap, and as
she could not read, she put her broom in the corner, and took the
letter to her employers, and behold it was an invitation from
the elves, who asked the girl to hold a child for them at its
christening.  The girl did not know what to do, but, at length,
after much persuasion, and as they told her that it was not
right to refuse an invitation of this kind, she consented.

Then three elves came and conducted her to a hollow mountain,
where the little folks lived.  Everything there was small, but
more elegant and beautiful than can be described.  The baby's
mother lay in a bed of black ebony ornamented with pearls, the
covers were embroidered with gold, the cradle was of ivory, the
bath-tub of gold.  The girl stood as godmother, and then wanted
to go home again, but the little elves urgently entreated her to
stay three days with them.  So she stayed, and passed the time in
pleasure and gaiety, and the little folks did all they could to
make her happy.  At last she set out on her way home.  But first
they filled her pockets quite full of money, and then they led
her out of the mountain again.  When she got home, she wanted to
to begin her work, and took the broom, which was still standing
in the corner, in her hand and began to sweep.  Then some
strangers came out of the house, who asked her who she was, and
what business she had there.  And she had not, as she thought,
been three days with the little men in the mountains, but
seven years, and in the meantime her former masters had died.

A certain mother had her child taken out of its cradle by the
elves, and a changeling with a large head and staring eyes,
which would do nothing but eat and drink, lay in its place.
In her trouble she went to her neighbor, and asked her advice.
The neighbour said that she was to carry the changeling into the
kitchen, set it down on the hearth, light a fire, and boil
some water in two egg-shells, which would make the changeling
laugh, and if he laughed, all would be over with him.  The
woman did everything that her neighbor bade her.  When she put
the egg-shells with water on the fire, goggle-eyes said, I am as
old now as the wester forest, but never yet have I seen anyone
boil anything in an egg-shell.  And he began to laugh at it.

Whilst he was laughing, suddenly came a host of little elves, who
brought the right child, set it down on the hearth, and took the
changeling away with them.

There was once upon a time a miller, who had a beautiful
daughter, and as she was grown up, he wished that she was
provided for, and well married.  He thought, if any good suitor
comes and asks for her, I will give her to him.  Not long
afterwards, a suitor came, who appeared to be very rich, and as
the miller had no fault to find with him, he promised his
daughter to him.  The maiden, however, did not like him quite
so much as a girl should like the man to whom she is engaged, and
had no confidence in him.  Whenever she saw, or thought of him,
she felt a secret horror.  Once he said to her, you are my
betrothed, and yet you have never once paid me a visit. The
maiden replied, I know not where your house is. Then said the
bridegroom, my house is out there in the dark forest.  She
tried to excuse herself
and said she could not find the way there.  The bridegroom said,
next sunday you must come out there to me, I have already
invited the guests, and I will strew ashes in order that you may
find your way through the forest.  When sunday came, and the
maiden had to set out on her way, she became very uneasy, she
herself knew not exactly why, and to mark her way she filled both
her pockets full of peas and lentils.  Ashes were strewn at the
entrance of the forest, and these she followed, but at every step
she threw a couple of peas on the ground.  She walked almost the
whole day until she reached the middle of the forest, where it
was the darkest, and there stood a solitary house, which she did
not like, for it looked so dark and dismal.  She went inside it,
but no one was within, and the most absolute stillness reigned.

Suddenly a voice cried,
	turn back, turn back, young maiden dear,
	'tis a murderer's house you enter here.
The maiden looked up, and saw that the voice came from a bird,
which was hanging in a cage on the wall.  Again  it cried,
	turn back, turn back, young maiden dear,
	'tis a murderer's house you enter here.

Then the young maiden went on farther from one room to another,
and walked through the whole house, but it was entirely empty
and not one human being was to be found.  At last she came to the
the cellar, and there sat an extremely aged woman, whose head
shook constantly.  Can you not tell me, said the maiden, if my
betrothed lives here.

Alas, poor child, replied the old woman, whither have you come.
You are in a murderer's den.  You think you are a bride soon to be
married, but you will keep your wedding with death.  Look, I
have been forced to put a great kettle on there, with water in it,
and when they have you in their power, they will cut you to
pieces without mercy, will cook you, and eat you, for they are
eaters of human flesh.  If I do not have compassion on you, and
save you, you are lost.

Thereupon the old woman led her behind a great hogshead
where she could not be seen.  Be still as a mouse, said she, do
not make a sound, or move, or all will be over with you.  At
night, when the robbers are asleep, we will escape, I have long
waited for an opportunity.  Hardly was this done, than the godless
crew came home.  They dragged with them another young girl.  They
were drunk, and paid no heed to her screams and lamentations.

They gave her wine to drink, three glasses full, one glass of
white wine, one glass of red, and a glass of yellow, and with
this her heart burst in twain.  Thereupon they tore off her
delicate raiment, laid her on a table, cut her beautiful body
in pieces and strewed salt thereon.  The poor bride behind the
cask trembled and shook, for she saw right well what fate the
robbers had destined for her.  One of them noticed a gold ring on
the finger of the murdered girl, and as it would not come off at
once, he took an axe and cut the finger off, but it sprang up in
the air, away over the cask and fell straight into the bride's
bosom.  The robber took a candle and wanted to look for it, but
could not find it.  Then another of them said, have you
looked behind the great hogshead.  But the old woman cried,
come and get something to eat, and leave off looking till the
morning, the finger won't run away from you.

Then the robbers said, the old woman is right, and gave up their
search, and sat down to eat, and the old woman poured a
sleeping-draught in their wine, so that they soon lay down
in the cellar, and slept and snored.  When the bride heard
that, she came out from behind the hogshead, and had to step
over the sleepers, for they lay in rows on the ground, and great
was her terror lest she should waken one of them.  But God
helped her, and she got safely over.  The old woman went up with
her, opened the doors, and they hurried out of the murderer's den
with all the speed in their power.  The wind had blown away the
strewn ashes, but the peas and lentils had sprouted and grown up,
and showed them the way in the moonlight. They walked the whole
night, until in the morning they arrived at the mill, and then the
maiden told her father everything exactly as it had happened.

When the day came for the wedding to be celebrated, the bridegroom
appeared, and the miller had invited all his relations and
friends.  As they sat at table, each was bidden to relate
something.  The bride sat still, and said nothing.  Then said the
bridegroom to the bride, come, my darling, do you know nothing.
Relate something to us like the rest.  She replied, then I will
relate a dream.  I was walking alone through a wood, and at last
I came to a house, in which no living soul was, but on the wall
there was a bird in a cage which cried,
	turn back, turn back, young maiden dear,
	'tis a murderer's house you enter here.
And this it cried once more.  My darling, I only dreamt this.

Then I went through all the rooms, and they were all empty, and
there was something so horrible about them.  At last I went down
into the cellar, and there sat a very very old woman, whose head
shook.  I asked her, does my bridegroom live in this house.  She
answered, alas poor child, you have got into a murderer's den,
your bridegroom does live here, but he will hew you in pieces,
and kill you, and then he will cook you, and eat you.  My darling
I only dreamt this.  But the old woman hid me behind a great
hogshead, and scarcely was I hidden, when the robbers came home,
dragging a maiden with them, to whom they gave three kinds of
wine to drink, white, red, and yellow, with which her heart broke
in twain.  My darling, I only dreamt this.  Thereupon they pulled
off her pretty clothes, and hewed her fair body in pieces on a
table, and sprinkled them with salt.  My darling, I only dreamt
this.  And one of the robbers saw that there was still a ring on
her little finger, and as it was hard to draw off, he took an axe
and cut it off, but the finger sprang up in the air, and sprang
behind the great hogshead, and fell in my bosom.  And there is the
finger with the ring.  And with these words she drew it forth, and
showed it to those present.

The robber, who had during this story become as pale as ashes,
leapt up and wanted to escape, but the guests held him fast, and
delivered him over to justice.  Then he and his whole troop were
executed for their infamous deeds.
A poor man had so many children that he had already asked
everyone in the world to be godfather, and when still another
child was born, no one else was left whom he could invite.
He knew not what to do, and, in his perplexity, he lay down
and fell asleep.  Then he dreamt that he was to go outside the
gate,
and ask the first person he met to be godfather.  When he awoke,
he determined to obey his dream, and went outside the gate, and
asked the first person who came up to him to be godfather.  The
stranger presented him with a little glass of water, and said,
this is a wonderful water, with it you can heal the sick, only
you must see where death is standing.  If he is standing by the
patient's head, give the patient some of the water and he will
be healed, but if death is standing by his feet, all trouble
will be in vain, for the sick man must die.  From this time forth,
the man could always say whether a patient could be saved or
not, and became famous for his skill, and earned a great deal
of money.  Once he was called in to the child of the king, and
when he entered, he saw death standing by the child's head and
cured it with the water, and he did the same a second time, but
the third time death was standing by its feet, and then he knew
the child had to die.

Once the man thought he would visit the godfather, and tell him
how he had succeeded with the water.  But when he entered the
house, the strangest things were going on within.  On the first
flight of stairs, the broom and shovel were disputing, and
knocking each other about violently.  He asked them, where does
the godfather live.  The broom replied, one flight of stairs
higher up.  When he came to the second flight, he saw a heap of
dead fingers lying.  He asked, where does the godfather live.
One of the fingers replied, one flight of stairs higher.  On
the third flight lay a heap of dead heads, which again directed
him to the flight beyond.  On the fourth flight, he saw fishes on
the fire, which frizzled in pans and baked themselves.  They,
too, said, one flight of stairs higher.  And when he had
ascended the fifth, he came to the door of a room and peeped
through the keyhole, and there he saw the godfather who had
a pair of long horns.  When he opened the door and went in,
the godfather got into bed in a great hurry and covered himself
up.  Then said the man, sir godfather, what a strange house-hold
you have.  When I came to your first flight of stairs, the shovel
and broom were quarreling, and beating each other violently.
How stupid you are, said the godfather.  That was the boy
and the maid talking to each other.  But on the second flight I
saw dead fingers lying.  Oh, how silly you are.  Those were some
roots of scorzonera.  On the third flight lay a heap of dead
men's heads.  Foolish man, those were cabbages.  On the fourth
flight I saw fishes in a pan, which were hissing and baking
themselves.  When he had said that, the fishes came and served
themselves up.  And when I got to the fifth flight, I peeped
through the keyhole of a door, and there, godfather, I saw
you and you had long, long horns.  Oh, that is not true.  The
man became alarmed, and ran out, and if he had not, who knows
what the godfather would have done to him.
There was once a little girl who was obstinate and inquisitive,
and when her parents told her to do anything, she did not obey
them, so how could she fare well.  One day she said to her
parents, I have heard so much of frau trude, I will go to her
some day.  People say that everything about her does look so
strange, and that there are such odd things in her house, that
I have become quite curious.  Her parents absolutely forbade
her, and said, frau trude is a bad woman, who does wicked things,
and if you go to her, you are no longer our child.  But the maiden
did not let herself be turned aside by her parents, prohibition,
and still went to frau trude.  And when she got to her, frau
trude said, why are you so pale.  Ah, she replied, and her whole
body trembled, I have been so terrified at what I have seen.  What
have you seen.  I saw a black man on your steps.  That was a
collier.  Then I saw a green man.  That was a huntsman.  After
that I saw a blood-red man.  That was a butcher.  Ah, frau
trude, I was terrified.  I looked through the window and saw
not you, but, as I verily believe, the devil himself with a head
of fire.  Oho. Said she, then you have seen the witch in her
proper costume.  I have been waiting for you, and wanting you
a long time already.  You shall give me some light.  Then she
changed the girl into a block of wood, and threw it into the
fire.  And when it was in a full blaze she sat down close to it,
and warmed herself by it, and said, that shines bright for once
in a way.
A poor man had twelve children and was forced to work night and
day to give them even bread.  When therefore the thirteenth
came into the world, he knew not what to do in his trouble,
but ran out into the great highway, and resolved to ask the
first person whom he met to be godfather.  The first to meet
him was the good God who already knew what filled his heart,
and said to him, poor man, I pity you.  I will hold your child
at its christening, and will take charge of it and make it
happy on earth.  The man said, who are you.  I am God.  Then
I do not desire to have you for a godfather, said the man, you give
to the rich, and leave the poor to hunger.  Thus spoke the man,
for he did not know how wisely God apportions riches and
poverty.  He turned therefore away from the Lord, and went
farther.  Then the devil came to him and said, what do you seek.
If you will take me as a godfather for your child, I will give him
gold in plenty and all the joys of the world as well.  The man
asked, who are you.  I am the devil.  Then I do not desire to have
you for godfather, said the man, you deceive men and lead them
astray.  He went onwards, and then came death striding up to
him with withered legs, and said, take me as godfather.  The
man asked, who are you.  I am death, and I make all equal.  Then
said the man,
you are the right one, you take the rich as well as the poor,
without distinction, you shall be godfather.  Death answered,
I will make your child rich and famous, for he who has me for a
friend can lack nothing.  The man said, next sunday is the
christening, be there at the right time.  Death appeared as he
had promised, and stood godfather quite in the usual way.
When the boy had grown up, his godfather one day appeared
and bade him go with him.  He led him forth into a forest, and
showed him a herb which grew there, and said, now you shall
receive your godfather's present.  I make you a celebrated
physician.  When you are called to a patient, I will always appear
to you.  If I stand by the head of the sick man, you may say with
confidence that you will make him well again, and if you give
him of this herb he will recover, but if I stand by the patient's
feet, he is mine, and you must say that all remedies are in
vain, and that no physician in the world could save him.  But
beware of using the herb against my will, or it might fare
ill with you.

It was not long before the youth was the most famous physician
in the whole world.  He had only to look at the patient and he
knew his condition at once, whether he would recover, or must
needs die.  So they said of him, and from far and wide people
came to him, sent for him when they had anyone ill, and gave him
so much money that he soon became a rich man.  Now it so befell
that the king became ill, and the physician was summoned, and
was to say if recovery were possible.  But when he came to the bed,
death was standing by the feet of the sick man, and the herb
did not grow which could save him.  If I could but cheat death for
once, thought the physician, he is sure to take it ill if I do
but, as I am his godson, he will shut one eye, I will risk it.  He
therefore took up the sick man, and laid him the other way, so
that now death was standing by his head.  Then he gave the king
some of the herbs, and he recovered and grew healthy again.

But death came to the physician, looking very black and
angry, threatened him with his finger, and said, you have betrayed
me, this time I will pardon
it, as you are my godson, but if you venture it again, it
will cost you your neck, for I will take you yourself away
with me.

Soon afterwards the king's daughter fell into a severe illness.
She was his only child, and he wept day and night, so that he
began to lose the sight of his eyes, and he caused it to be
made known that whosoever rescued her from death should be her
husband and inherit the crown.  When the physician came to the
sick girl's bed, he saw death by her feet.  He ought to have
remembered the warning given by his godfather, but he was so
infatuated by the great beauty of the king's daughter, and the
happiness of becoming her husband, that he flung all thought to
the winds.  He did not see that death was casting angry glances
on him, that he was raising his hand in the air, and threatening
him with his withered fist.  He raised up the sick girl,
and placed her head where her feet had lain.  Then he gave
her some of the herb, and instantly her cheeks flushed red,
and life stirred afresh in her.

When death saw that for a second time his own property had been
misused, he walked up to the physician with long strides, and
said, all is over with you, and now the lot falls on you, and
seized him so firmly with his ice-cold hand, that he could not
resist, and led him into a cave below the earth.  There he
saw how thousands and thousands of candles were burning in
countless rows, some large, some medium-sized, others small.
Every instant some were extinguished, and others again burnt up,
so that the flames seemed to leap hither and thither in
perpetual change.  See, said death, these are the lights of
men's lives.  The large ones belong to children, the medium-sized
ones to married people in their prime, the little ones belong
to old people, but children and young folks likewise have
often only a tiny candle.  Show me the light of my life, said
the physician, and he thought that it would be still very
tall.  Death pointed to a little end which was just threatening
to go out, and said, behold, it is there.  Ah, dear godfather,
said the horrified physician, light a new one for me, do it for
love of me, that I may enjoy my life, be king, and the husband of
the king's beautiful daughter.  I cannot, answered death,
one must go out
before a new one is lighted.  Then place the old one on a new
one, that will go on burning at once when the old one has come
to an end, pleaded the physician.  Death behaved as if he were
going to fulfill his wish, and took hold of a tall new candle,
but as he desired to revenge himself, he purposely made a mistake
in fixing it, and the little piece fell down and was extinguished.
Immediately the physician fell on the ground, and now he himself
was in the hands of death.
A certain tailor had a son, who happened to be small, and
no bigger than a thumb, and on this account he was always
called thumbling.  He had, however, some courage in him, and
said to his father, father, I must and will go out into the
world.  That's right, my son, said the old man, and took a
long darning-needle and made a knob of sealing-wax on it at the
handle, and there is a sword for you to take with you on the way.
Then the little tailor wanted to have one more meal with them,
and hopped into the kitchen to see what his mother had cooked
for the last time.  But it was already served, and the dish stood
on the hearth.  Then he said, mother, what is there to eat to-day.
See for yourself, said his mother.  So thumbling jumped on to the
hearth, and peeped into the dish, but as he stretched his neck
in too far the steam from the food caught hold of him, and carried
him up the chimney.  He rode about in the air on the steam for a
while, until at length he sank down to the ground again.  Now
the little tailor was outside in the wide world, and he traveled
about, and went to a master in his craft, but the food was not
good enough for him.  Mistress, if you give us no better food,
said thumbling, I will go away, and early to-morrow morning
I will write with chalk on
the door of your house - too many potatoes, too little meat.

Farewell, mr. Potato-king.  What would you have forsooth,
grasshopper, said the mistress, and grew angry, and seized
a dishcloth, and was just going to strike him, but my little
tailor crept nimbly under a thimble, peeped out from beneath it,
and put his tongue out at the mistress.  She took up the thimble,
and wanted to get hold of him, but little thumbling hopped into
the cloth, and while the mistress was opening it out and looking
for him, he got into a crevice in the table.  Ho, ho, lady
mistress, cried he, and thrust his head out, and when she began
to strike him he leapt down into the drawer.  At last, however,
she caught him and drove him out of the house.

The little tailor journeyed on and came to a great forest, and
there he fell in with a band of robbers who had a design to
steal the king's treasure.  When they saw the little tailor,
they thought, a little fellow like that can creep through a
key-hole and serve as picklock to us.  HI, there, cried one of
them, you giant goliath, will you go to the treasure-chamber
with us.  You can slip yourself in and throw out the money.
Thumbling reflected a while, and at length he said, yes, and went
with them to the treasure-chamber.  Then he looked at the doors
above and below, to see if there was any crack in them.  It was
not long before he espied one which was broad enough to let
him in.  He was therefore about to get in at once, but one
of the two sentries who stood before the door, observed him, and
said to the other, what an ugly spider is creeping there, I
will kill it.  Let the poor creature alone, said the other,
it has done you no harm.  Then thumbling got safely through the
crevice into the treasure-chamber, opened the window beneath
which the robbers were standing, and threw out to them one
taler after another.  When the little tailor was in the full
swing of his work, he heard the king coming to inspect his
treasure-chamber, and crept hastily into a hiding-place.  The king
noticed that several solid talers were missing, but could not
conceive who could have stolen them, for locks and bolts were
in good condition, and all
seemed well guarded.  Then he went away again, and said to the
sentries, be on the watch, someone is after the money.  When
therefore thumbling recommenced his labors, they heard the money
moving, and a sound of klink, klink, klink.  They ran swiftly
in to seize the thief, but the little tailor, who heard them
coming, was still swifter, and leapt into a corner and covered
himself with a taler, so that nothing could be seen of him, and
at the same time he mocked the sentries and cried, here am I.
The sentries ran thither, but as they got there, he had
already hopped into another corner under a taler, and was
crying, ho, ho, here am I.  And thus he made fools of them,
and drove them so long round about the treasure-chamber that
they were weary and went away.  Then by degrees he threw all the
talers out, dispatching the last with all his might, then hopped
nimbly upon it, and flew down with it through the window.  The
robbers paid him great compliments.  You are a valiant hero,
said they, will you be our captain.

Thumbling, however, declined, and said he wanted to see the
world first.  They now divided the booty, but the little tailor
only asked for a kreuzer because he could not carry more.
Then he once more buckled on his sword, bade the robbers goodbye,
and took to the road.  First, he went to work with some masters,
but he had no liking for that, and at last he hired himself
as manservant in an inn.  The maids, however, could not endure
him, for he saw all they did secretly, without their
seeing him, and he told their employers what they had taken off
the plates, and carried away out of the cellar, for themselves.
Then said they, wait, and we will pay you out, and arranged with
each other to play him a trick.  Soon afterwards when one of the
maids was mowing in the garden, and saw thumbling jumping about
and creeping up and down the plants, she mowed him up quickly with
the grass, tied all in a great cloth, and secretly threw it to
the cows.  Now amongst them there was a great black one, who
swallowed him down without hurting him.  Down below, however, it
did not suit him, for it
was quite dark, neither was any candle burning.  When the cow
was being milked he cried,
          strip, strap, strull,
          when will the pail be full.

But the noise of the milking prevented his being understood.
After this the master of the house came into the stall and
said, that cow shall be killed to-morrow.  Then thumbling was so
alarmed that he cried out in a clear voice, let me out first,
I am sitting inside her.  The master heard that quite well,
but did not know from whence the voice came.  Where are you, asked
he.  In the black one, answered thumbling, but the master
did not understand what that meant, and went out.

Next morning the cow was killed.  Happily thumbling did not meet
with one blow at the cutting up and chopping, he got among
the sausage-meat.  And when the butcher came in and began his
work, he cried out with all his might, don't chop too deep,
don't chop too deep, I am amongst it.  No one heard this because
of the noise of the chopping-knife.  Now poor thumbling was in
trouble, but trouble sharpens the wits, and he sprang out so
adroitly between the blows that none of them touched him, and
he escaped with a whole skin.  But still he could not get away,
there was nothing for it but to let himself be thrust into a
black-pudding with the bits of bacon.  His quarters there were
rather confined, and besides that he was hung up in the chimney
to be smoked, and there time did hang terribly heavy on his hands.
At length in winter he was taken down again, as the black-pudding
had to be set before a guest.  When the hostess was cutting
it in slices, he took care not to stretch out his head too
far lest a bit of it should be cut off, at last he saw his
opportunity, cleared a passage for himself, and jumped out.

The little tailor, however, would not stay any longer in a house
where he fared so ill, so at once set out on his journey again.
But his liberty did not last long.  In the open country he met
with a fox who snapped him up without thinking.  HI, there,
mr. Fox, cried
the little tailor, it is I who am sticking in your throat, set
me at liberty again.  You are right, answered the fox.  You
are next to nothing for me, but if you will promise me the
fowls in your father's yard I will let you go.  With all my
heart, replied thumbling.  You shall have all the cocks and hens,
that I promise you.  Then the fox let him go again, and himself
carried him home.  When the father once more saw his dear son,
he willingly gave the fox all the fowls which he had.  For this
I likewise bring you a handsome bit of money, said thumbling, and
gave his father the kreuzer which he earned on his travels.
But why did the fox get the poor chickens to eat.  Oh, you
silly, your father would surely love his child far more than the
fowls in the yard.
There was once a wizard who used to take the form of a poor
man, and went to houses and begged, and caught pretty girls.
No one knew whither he carried them, for they were never
seen again.  One day he appeared before the door of a man
who had three pretty daughters.  He looked like a poor weak
beggar, and carried a basket on his back, as if he meant to collect
charitable gifts in it.  He begged for a little food, and when
the eldest daughter came out and was just handing him a
piece of bread, he did but touch her, and she was forced to jump
into his basket.  Thereupon he hurried off with long strides, and
carried her away into a dark forest to his house, which stood
in the midst of it.  Everything in the house was magnificent.
He gave her whatsoever she could possibly desire, and said,
my darling, you will certainly be happy with me, for you have
everything your heart can wish for.  This lasted a few days, and
then he said, I must journey forth, and
leave you alone for a short time.  Here are the keys of the house.
You may go everywhere and look at everything except into one
room, which this little key opens, and there I forbid you to go
on pain of death.  He likewise gave her an egg and said, preserve
the egg carefully for me, and carry it continually about with you,
for a great misfortune would arise from the loss of it.

She took the keys and the egg, and promised to obey him in
everything.  When he was gone, she went all round the house from the
bottom to the top, and examined everything.  The rooms shone with
silver and gold, and she thought she had never seen such great
splendor.  At length she came to the forbidden door.  She wished to
pass it by, but curiosity let her have no rest.  She examined the
key, it looked just like any other.  She put it in the keyhole and
turned it a little, and the door sprang open.  But what did she
see when she went in.  A great bloody basin stood in the middle
of the room, and therein lay human beings, dead and hewn to pieces,
and hard by was a block of wood, and a gleaming axe lay upon it.
She was so terribly alarmed that the egg which she held in her
hand fell into the basin.  She got it out and wiped the blood off,
but in vain, it appeared again in a moment.  She washed and
scrubbed, but she could not get it off.

It was not long before the man came back from his journey, and
the first things which he asked for were the key and the egg.
She gave them to him, but she trembled as she did so, and he saw
at once by the red spots that she had been in the bloody chamber.
Since you have gone into the room against my will, said he, you
shall go back into it against your own.  Your life is ended.
He threw her down, dragged her along by her hair, cut her head off
on the block, and hewed her in pieces so that her blood ran on
the ground.  Then he threw her into the basin with the rest.

Now I will fetch myself the second, said the wizard, and again he
went to the house in the shape of a poor man, and begged.  Then
the second daughter brought him a piece of bread.  He caught her
like the first, by simply touching her, and carried her away.
She did not fare better than her sister.  She allowed herself to be
led
away by her curiosity, opened the door of the bloody chamber,
looked in, and had to atone for it with her life on the wizard's
return.  Then he went and brought the third sister, but she
was clever and wily.  When he had given her the keys and the egg,
and had left her, she first put the egg away with great care, and
then she examined the house, and at last went into the forbidden
room.  Alas, what did she behold.  Both her dear sisters lay there
in the basin, cruelly murdered, and cut into pieces.  But she
began to gather their limbs together and put them in order, head,
body, arms and legs.  And when nothing further was wanting the
limbs began to move and unite themselves together, and both the
maidens opened their eyes and were once more alive.  Then they
rejoiced and kissed and caressed each other.

On his arrival, the man at once demanded the keys and the egg,
and as he could perceive no trace of any blood on it, he said,
you have stood the test, you shall be my bride.  He now had
no longer any power over her, and was forced to do whatsoever
she desired.  Oh, very well, said she, you shall first take a
basketful of gold to my father and mother, and carry it
yourself on your back.  In the meantime I will prepare for the
wedding.  Then she ran to her sisters, whom she had hidden
in a little chamber, and said, the moment has come when I can
save you.  The wretch shall himself carry you home again, but
as soon as you are at home send help to me.  She put both of
them in a basket and covered them quite over with gold, so
that nothing of them was to be seen.  Then she called in the
wizard and said to him, now carry the basket away, but I
shall look through my little window and watch to see if you
stop on the way to stand or to rest.

The wizard raised the basket on his back and went away with
it, but it weighed him down so heavily that the sweat streamed
from his face.  Then he sat down and wanted to rest awhile, but
immediately one of the girls in the basket cried, I am looking
through my little window, and I see that you are resting.
Will you go on at once.  He thought it was his bride who was
talking to
him, and he got up on his legs again.  Once more he was going to
sit down, but instantly she cried, I am looking through my
little window, and I see that you are resting.  Will you go on
directly.  And whenever he stood still, she cried this, and then
he was forced to go onwards, until at last, groaning and out
of breath, he took the basket with the gold and the two
maidens into their parents, house.  At home, however, the
bride prepared the marriage-feast, and sent invitations to the
friends of the wizard.  Then she took a skull with grinning
teeth, put some ornaments on it and a wreath of flowers,
carried it upstairs to the garret-window, and let it look out
from thence.  When all was ready, she got into a barrel of
honey, and then cut the feather-bed open and rolled herself
in it, until she looked like a wondrous bird, and no one could
recognize her.  Then she went out of the house, and on her
way she met some of the wedding-guests, who asked,
          o, fitcher's bird, how com'st thou here.
          I come from fitcher's house quite near.
          And what may the young bride be doing.
          From cellar to garret she's swept all clean,
          and now from the window she's peeping, I ween.

At last she met the bridegroom, who was coming slowly back.
He, like the others, asked,
          o, fitcher's bird, how com'st thou here.
          I come from fitcher's house quite near.
          And what may the young bride be doing.
          From cellar to garret she's swept all clean,
          and now from the window she's peeping, I ween.

The bridegroom looked up, saw the decked-out skull, thought it
was his bride, and nodded to her, greeting her kindly.  But
when he and his guests had all gone into the house, the
brothers and kinsmen of the bride, who had been sent to rescue
her, arrived.  They locked all the doors of the house, that no
one might escape, set fire to it, and the wizard and all his
crew had to burn.
It is now long ago, quite two thousand years, since there was
a rich man who had a beautiful and pious wife, and they loved
each other dearly.  They had, however, no children, though they
wished for them very much, and the woman prayed for them day
and night, but still they had none.  Now there was a court-yard
in front of their house in which was a juniper tree, and one day
in winter the woman was standing beneath it, paring herself an
apple, and while she was paring herself the apple she cut her
finger, and the blood fell on the snow.  Ah, said the woman,
and sighed right heavily, and looked at the blood before her, and
was most unhappy, ah, if I had but a child as red as blood and
as white as snow.  And while she thus spoke, she became quite
happy in her mind, and felt just as if that were going to happen.
Then she went into the house and a month went by and the snow
was gone, and two months, and then everything was green, and three
months, and then all the flowers came out of the earth, and four
months, and then all the trees in the wood grew thicker, and the
green branches were all closely entwined, and the birds sang
until the wood resounded and the blossoms fell from the trees,
then the fifth month passed away and she stood under the juniper
tree, which smelt so sweetly that her heart leapt, and she fell
on her knees and was beside herself with joy, and when the sixth
month was over the fruit was large and fine, and then she was
quite still, and the seventh month she snatched at the
juniper-berries and ate them greedily, then she grew sick and
sorrowful, then the eighth month passed, and she called her
husband to her, and wept and said, if I die then bury me
beneath the juniper tree.  Then she was quite comforted and
happy until the next month was over, and then she had a child
as white as snow and as red as blood, and when she beheld it
she was so delighted that she died.

Then her husband buried her beneath the juniper tree, and he
began to weep sore, after some time he was more at ease, and
though he still wept he could bear it, and after some time
longer he took another wife.

By the second wife he had a daughter, but the first wife's child
was a little son, and he was as red as blood and as white as snow.
When the woman looked at her daughter she loved her very much,
but then she looked at the little boy and it seemed to cut her
to the heart, for the thought came into her mind that he would
always stand in her way, and she was for ever thinking how she
could get all the fortune for her daughter, and the evil one filled
her mind with this till she was quite wroth with the little boy
and she pushed him from one corner to the other and slapped him
here and cuffed him there, until the poor child was in continual
terror, for when he came out of school he had no peace in any
place.

One day the woman had gone upstairs to her room, and her little
daughter went up too, and said, mother, give me an apple.  Yes,
my child, said the woman, and gave her a fine apple out of the
chest, but the chest had a great heavy lid with a great sharp
iron lock.  Mother, said the little daughter, is brother not
to have one too.  This made the woman angry, but she said, yes,
when he comes out of school.  And when she saw from the window
that he was coming, it was just as if the devil entered into her,
and she snatched at the apple and took it away again from her
daughter, and said,  you shall not have one before your brother.

Then she threw the apple into the chest, and shut it.  Then the
little boy came in at the door, and the devil made her say to
him kindly, my son, will you have an apple. And she looked wickedly
at him.  Mother, said the little boy, how dreadful you look.
Yes, give me an apple.  Then it seemed to her as if she were
forced to say to him, come with me, and she opened the lid
of the chest and said, take out an apple for yourself, and
while the little boy was stooping inside, the devil prompted
her, and crash.  She shut the lid down, and his head flew off and
fell among the red apples.  Then she was overwhelmed with
terror, and thought, if I could but make them think that it
was not done by me.  So she went upstairs to her room to her
chest of drawers, and took a white handkerchief out of the top
drawer, and set the head on the neck again, and folded the
handkerchief so that nothing could be seen, and she set him
on a chair in front of the door, and put the apple in his hand.

After this Marlinchen came into the kitchen to her mother,
who was standing by the fire with a pan of hot water before her
which she was constantly stirring round.  "Mother," said Marlinchen,
"brother is sitting at the door, and he looks quite white and
has an apple in his hand.  I asked him to give me the apple,
but he did not answer me, and I was quite frightened."  "Go back
to him," said her mother, "and if he will not answer you, give him
a box on the ear."  So Marlinchen went to him and said, "Brother,
give me the apple."  But he was silent, and she gave him a box
on the ear, whereupon his head fell off.  Marlinchen was terrified,
and began crying and screaming, and ran to her mother, and said,
"Alas, mother, I have knocked my brother's head off," and she wept
and wept and could not be comforted.  "Marlinchen," said the mother,
what have you done, but be quiet and let no one know it, it
cannot be helped now, we will make him into black-puddings."
Then the mother took the little boy and chopped him in pieces,
put him into the pan and made him into black puddings, but
Marlinchen stood by weeping and weeping, and all her tears fell
into the pan and there was no need of any salt.

Then the father came home, and sat down to dinner and said,
"But where is my son?"  And the mother served up a great dish of
black-puddings, and Marlinchen wept and could not leave off.
Then the father again said, "But where is my son?"  "Ah," said the
mother, "he has gone across the coutry to his mother's great
uncle, he will stay there awhile."  "And what is he going to do
there?  He did not even say good-bye to me."

"Oh, he wanted to go, and asked me if he might stay six weeks,
he is well taken care of there."  "Ah," said the man, "I feel so
unhappy lest all should not be right.  He ought to have said
good-bye to me."  With that he began to eat and said, "Marlinchen,
why are you crying?  Your brother will certainly come back."
Then he said, "Ah, wife, how delicious this food is, give me
some more."  And the more he ate the more he wanted to have,
and he said, "Give me some more, you shall have none of it.
It seems to me as if it were all mine."  And he ate and ate and
threw all the bones under the table, until he had finished
the whole.  But Marlinchen went away to her chest of drawers,
and took her best silk handkerchief out of the bottom draw,
and got all the bones from beneath the table, and tied them up in
her silk handkerchief, and carried them outside the door,
weeping tears of blood.  Then she lay down under the juniper
tree on the green grass, and after she had lain down there, she
suddenly felt light-hearted and did not cry any more.  Then
the juniper tree began to stir itself, and the branches parted
asunder, and moved together again, just as if someone were
rejoicing and clapping his hands.  At the same time a mist seemed
to arise from the tree, and in the center of this mist it burned
like a fire, and a beautiful bird flew out of the fire singing
magnificently, and he flew high up in the air, and when he was gone,
the juniper tree was just as it had been before, and the
handkerchief with the bones was no longer there.  Marlinchen,
however, was as gay and happy as if her brother were still alive.
And she went merrily into the house, and sat down to dinner and
ate.

But the bird flew away and lighted on a goldsmith's house, and
began to sing -
     my mother she killed me,
     my father he ate me,
     my sister, little marlinchen,
     gathered together all my bones,
     tied them in a silken handkerchief,
     laid them beneath the juniper tree,
     kywitt, kywitt, what a beautiful bird am I.

The goldsmith was sitting in his workshop making a golden chain,
when he heard the bird which was sitting singing on his roof,
and very beautiful the song seemed to him.  He stood up, but
as he crossed the threshold he lost one of his slippers.
But he went away right up the middle of the street with one
shoe on and one sock, he had his apron on, and in one hand he
had the golden chain and in the other the pincers, and the sun was
shining brightly on the street.  Then he went right on and stood
still, and said to the bird, "Bird," said he then, "how beautifully
you can sing.  Sing me that piece again."  "No," said the bird,
"I'll not sing it twice for nothing.  Give me the golden chain,
and then I will sing it again for you."  "There," said the goldsmith,
"there is the golden chain for you, now sing me that song again."
Then the bird came and took the golden chain in his right claw,
and went and sat in front of the goldsmith, and sang -

     my mother she killed me,
     my father he ate me,
     my sister, little marlinchen,
     gathered together all my bones,
     tied them in a silken handkerchief,
     laid them beneath the juniper tree,
     kywitt, kywitt, what a beautiful bird am I.

Then the bird flew away to a shoemaker, and lighted on his
roof and sang -

     my mother she killed me,
     my father he ate me,
     my sister, little marlinchen,
     gathered together all my bones,
     tied them in a silken handkerchief,
     laid them beneath the juniper tree,
     kywitt, kywitt, what a beautiful bird am I.

The shoemaker heard that and ran out of doors in his shirt sleeves,
and looked up at his roof, and was forced to hold his hand before
his eyes lest the sun should blind him.  "Bird," said he, "how
beautifully you can sing."  Then he called in at his door,
"Wife, just come outside, there is a bird, look at that bird, he
certainly can sing."  Then he called his daughter and children,
and apprentices, boys and girls, and they all came up the
street and looked at the bird and saw how beautiful he was, and
what fine red and green feathers he had, and how like real gold
his neck was, and how the eyes in his head shone like stars.  "Bird,"
said the shoemaker, "now sing me that song again."  "Nay," said the
bird, "I do not sing twice for nothing, you must give me something."
"Wife," said the man, "go to the garret, upon the top shelf there
stands a pair of red shoes, bring them down."  Then the wife
went and brought the shoes.  "There, bird," said the man, "now
sing me that piece again."  Then the bird came and took the shoes
in his left claw, and flew back on the roof, and sang -
     my mother she killed me,
     my father he ate me,
     my sister, little Marlinchen,
     gathered together all my bones,
     tied them in a silken handkerchief,
     laid them beneath the juniper tree,
     kywitt, kywitt, what a beautiful bird am I.

and when he had finished his song he flew away.  In his right
claw he had the chain and in his left the shoes, and he flew far
away to a mill, and the mill went, klipp klapp, klipp klapp,
klipp klapp, and in the mill sat twenty miller's men hewing a
stone, and cutting, hick hack, hick hack, hick hack, and the mill
went klipp klapp, klipp klapp'klipp klapp.  Then the bird went
and sat on a lime-tree which stood in front of the mill, and
sang -
     my mother she killed me,
then one of them stopped working,
     my father he ate me,
then two more stopped working and listened to that,
     my sister, little Marlinchen,
then four more stopped,
     gathered together all my bones,
     tied them in a silken handkerchief,
now eight only were hewing,
     laid them beneath,
now only five,
     the juniper tree,
and now only one,
     kywitt, kywitt, what a beautiful bird am I.

Then the last stopped also, and heard the last words.  "Bird,"
said he, "how beautifully you sing.  Let me, too, hear that.
Sing that once more for me."

"Nay," said the bird, "I will not sing twice for nothing.  Give me
the millstone, and then I will sing it again."

"Yes," said he, "if it belonged to me only, you should have it."
"Yes," said the others, "if he sings again he shall have it."  Then
the bird came down, and the twenty millers all set to work with a
beam and raised the stone up.  And the bird stuck his neck
through the hole, and put the stone on as if it were a collar,
and flew on to the tree again, and sang -
     my mother she killed me,
     my father he ate me,
     my sister, little Marlinchen,
     gathered together all my bones,
     tied them in a silken handkerchief,
     laid them beneath the juniper tree,
     kywitt, kywitt, what a beautiful bird am I.

And when he had done singing, he spread his wings, and in his
right claw he had the chain, and in his left the shoes, and
round his neck the millstone, and he flew far away to his father's
house.

In the room sat the father, the mother, and Marlinchen at dinner,
and the father said, "How light-hearted I feel, how happy I am."
"Nay," said the mother, "I feel so uneasy, just as if a heavy
storm were coming."  Marlinchen, however, sat weeping and weeping,
and then came the bird flying, and as it seated itself on the
roof the father said, "Ah, I feel so truly happy, and the sun is
shining so beautifully outside, I feel just as if I were about
to see some old friend again."  "Nay," said the woman, "I feel so
anxious, my teeth chatter, and I seem to have fire in my veins."
And she tore her stays open, but Marlinchen sat in a corner crying,
and held her plate before her eyes and cried till it was quite
wet.  Then the bird sat on the juniper tree, and sang -
     my mother she killed me,
then the mother stopped her ears, and shut her eyes, and would
not see or hear, but there was a roaring in her ears like the
most violent storm, and her eyes burnt and flashed like
lightning -
     my father he ate me,
"Ah, mother," says the man, "that is a beautiful bird.  He sings so
splendidly, and the sun shines so warm, and there is a smell just
like cinnamon."
     My sister, little Marlinchen,
then Marlinchen laid her head on her knees and wept without
ceasing, but the man said, "I am going out, I must see the bird
quite close."  "Oh, don't go," said the woman, "I feel as if the
whole house were shaking and on fire."  But the man went out and
looked at the bird.
     gathered together all my bones,
     tied them in a silken handkerchief,
     laid them beneath the juniper tree,
     kywitt, kywitt, what a beautiful bird am I
on this the bird let the golden chain fall, and it fell exactly
round the man's neck, and so exactly round it that it fitted
beautifully.  Then he went in and said, "just look what a fine bird
that is, and what a handsome golden chain he has given me, and how
pretty he is."  But the woman was terrified, and fell down on
the floor in the room, and her cap fell off her head.  Then sang
the bird once more -
     my mother she killed me.
"Would that I were a thousand feet beneath the earth so as not
to hear that."
     My father he ate me,
then the woman fell down again as if dead.
     My sister, little marlinchen,
"Ah," said Marlinchen, "I too will go out and see if the bird will
give me anything," and she went out.
     Gathered together all my bones,
     tied them in a silken handkerchief,
then he threw down the shoes to her.
     Laid them beneath the juniper tree,
     kywitt, kywitt, what a beautiful bird am I.

Then she was light-hearted and joyous, and she put on the new red
shoes, and danced and leaped into the house.  "Ah," said she, "I
was so sad when I went out and now I am so light-hearted, that
is a splendid bird, he has given me a pair of red shoes."  "Well,"
said the woman, and sprang to her feet and her hair stood up
like flames of fire, "I feel as if the world were coming to an end.
I too, will go out and see if my heart feels lighter."  And as
she went out at the door, crash. The bird threw down the millstone
on her head, and she was entirely crushed by it.

The father and Marlinchen heard what had happened and went out, and smoke,
flames, and fire were rising from the place, and when that was
over, there stood the little brother, and he took his father and
Marlinchen by the hand, and all three were right glad, and they
went into the house to dinner, and ate.
A farmer once had a faithful dog called sultan, who had grown
old, and lost all his teeth, so that he could no longer hold on
to anything.  One day the farmer was standing with his wife before
the house-door, and said, to-morrow I intend to shoot old sultan,
he is no longer of any use.

His wife, who felt pity for the faithful beast, answered, he has
served us so long, and been so faithful, that we might well give
him his keep.

What, said the man, you are not very bright.  He has not a tooth
left in his head, and not a thief is afraid of him, now he can
go.  If he has served us, he has had good feeding for it.

The poor dog, who was lying stretched out in the sun not far off,
had heard everything, and was sorry that the morrow was to be his
last day.  He had a good friend, the wolf, and he crept out in
the evening into the forest to him, and complained of the fate
that awaited him.  Listen, gossip, said the wolf, be of good
cheer, I will help you out of your trouble.  I have thought of
something.  To-morrow, early in the morning, your master is
going with his wife to make hay, and they will take their little
child with them, for no one will be left behind in the house.
They are wont, during work-time, to lay the child under the hedge
in the shade, you lay yourself there too, just as if you wished
to guard it.  Then I will come out of the wood, and carry off
the child.  You must rush swiftly after me, as if you would
seize it again from me.  I will let it fall, and you will take
it back to its parents, who will think that you have saved it,
and will be far too grateful to do you any harm, on the contrary,
you will be in high favor, and they will never let you want
for anything again.

The plan pleased the dog, and it was carried out just as it was
arranged.  The father screamed when he saw the wolf running across
the field with his child, but when old sultan brought it back,
then he was full of joy, and stroked him and said, not a hair
of yours shall be hurt, you shall eat my bread free as long as
you live.  And to his wife he said, go home at once and make old
sultan some bread-sop that he will not have to bite, and bring the
pillow out of my bed, I will give him that to lie upon.

Henceforth old sultan was as well off as he could wish to be.
Soon afterwards the wolf visited him, and was pleased that
everything had succeeded so well.  But, gossip, said he, you will
just wink an eye if, when I have a chance, I carry off one of your
master's fat sheep.  Do not reckon upon that, answered the dog,
I will remain true to my master, I cannot agree to that.  The
wolf, who thought that this could not be spoken in earnest, came
creeping about in the night and was going to take away the sheep.
But the farmer, to whom the faithful sultan had told the wolf's
plan, caught him and dressed his hide soundly with the flail.
The wolf had to make himself scarce, but he cried out to the dog,
wait a bit, you scoundrel, you shall pay for this.

The next morning the wolf sent the boar to challenge the dog to
come out into the forest so that they might settle the affair.
Old sultan could find no one to stand by him but a cat with only
three legs, and as they went out together the poor cat limped
along, and at the same time stretched out her tail into the air
with pain.

The wolf and his friend were already at the appointed place, but
when they saw their enemy coming they thought that he was
bringing a sabre with him, for they mistook the outstretched tail
of the cat for one.  And when the poor beast hopped on its three
legs, they could only think every time that it was picking up a
stone to throw at them.  So they were both afraid, the wild boar
crept into the under-wood and the wolf jumped up a tree.

The dog and the cat, when they came up, wondered that there was
no one to be seen.  The wild boar, however, had not been able to
hide himself altogether, one of his ears was sticking out.  Whilst
the cat was looking carefully about, the boar moved his ear, the
cat, who thought it was a mouse moving there, jumped upon it and
bit it hard.  The boar made a fearful noise and ran away,
crying out, the guilty one is up in the tree.  The dog and cat
looked up and saw the wolf, who was ashamed of having shown himself
so timid, and made friends with the dog.
Once upon a time, a certain king was hunting in a great forest,
and he chased a wild beast so eagerly that none of his attendants
could follow him.  When evening drew near he stopped and looked
around him, and then he saw that he had lost his way.  He
sought a way out, but could find none.  Then he perceived an aged
woman with a head which nodded perpetually, who came towards
him, but she was a witch.  Good woman, said he to her, can
you not show me the way through the forest.  Oh, yes, lord
king, she answered, that I certainly can, but on one condition,
and if you do not fulfil that, you will never get out of the
forest, and will die of hunger in it.

What kind of condition is it, asked the king.
I have a daughter, said the old woman, who is as beautiful
as anyone in the world, and well deserves to be your consort,
and if you will make her your queen, I will show you the way out
of the forest.  In the anguish of his heart the king consented,
and the old woman led him to her little hut, where her daughter
was sitting by the fire.  She received the king as if she had been
expecting him, and he saw that she was very beautiful, but still
she did not please him, and he could not look at her without
secret horror.  After he had taken the maiden up on his horse,
the old woman showed him
the way, and the king reached his royal palace again, where the
wedding was celebrated.

The king had already been married once, and had by his first
wife, seven children, six boys and a girl, whom he loved
better than anything else in the world.  As he now feared that
the stepmother might not treat them well, and even do them some
injury, he took them to a lonely castle which stood in the
midst of a forest.  It lay so concealed, and the way was so
difficult to find that he himself would not have found it,
if a wise woman had not given him a ball of yarn with wonderful
properties.  When he threw it down before him, it unrolled
itself and showed him his path.

The king, however, went so
frequently away to his dear children that the queen observed
his absence, she was curious and wanted to know what he did
when he was quite alone in the forest.  She gave a great deal
of money to his servants, and they betrayed the secret to her,
and told her likewise of the ball which alone could point out
the way.  And now she knew no rest until she had learnt where
the king kept the ball of yarn, and then she made little shirts
of white silk, and as she had learnt the art of witchcraft from
her mother, she sewed a charm inside them.  And once when the
king had ridden forth to hunt, she took the little shirts and
went into the forest, and the ball showed her the way.

The
children, who saw from a distance that someone was approaching,
thought that their dear father was coming to them, and full of
joy, ran to meet him.  Then she threw one of the little shirts
over each of them, and no sooner had the shirts touched their
bodies than they were changed into swans, and flew away over
the forest.  The queen went home quite delighted, and thought
she had got rid of her step-children, but the girl had not run
out with her brothers, and the queen knew nothing about her.

Next day the king went to visit his children, but he found
no one but the little girl.  Where are your brothers, asked
the king.  Alas, dear father, she answered, they have gone away
and left me alone, and she told him that she had seen from
her little window how her brothers had flown away over the
forest
in the shape of swans, and she showed him the feathers, which
they had let fall in the courtyard, and which she had picked up.

The king mourned, but he did not think that the queen had
done this wicked deed, and as he feared that the girl would
also be stolen away from him, he wanted to take her away with him.
But she was afraid of her step-mother, and entreated the king
to let her stay just this one night more in the forest castle.

The poor girl thought, I can no longer stay here.  I will go
and seek my brothers.  And when night came, she ran away, and
went straight into the forest.  She walked the whole night long,
and next day also without stopping, until she could go no farther
for weariness.  Then she saw a forest-hut, and went into it, and
found a room with six little beds, but she did not venture to
get into one of them, but crept under one, and lay down on the
hard ground, intending to pass the night there.  Just before
sunset, however, she heard a rustling, and saw six swans come
flying in at the window.  They alighted on the ground and blew
at each other, and blew all the feathers off, and their swans,
skins stripped off like a shirt.  Then the maiden looked at them
and recognized her brothers, was glad and crept forth from beneath
the bed.  The brothers were not less delighted to see their
little sister, but their joy was of short duration.  Here you
cannot abide, they said to her.  This is a shelter for robbers,
if they come home and find you, they will kill you.  But can you
not protect me, asked the little sister.  No, they replied, only
for one quarter of an hour each evening can we lay aside our
swans, skins and have during that time our human form, after
that, we are once more turned into swans.

The little sister
wept and said, can you not be set free.  Alas, no, they answered,
the conditions are too hard.  For six years you may neither
speak nor laugh, and in that time you must sew together six
little shirts of starwort for us.  And if one single word falls
from your lips, all your work will be lost.  And when the brothers
had said this, the quarter of an hour was over, and they flew
out of the window again as swans.

The maiden, however, firmly resolved to deliver her brothers, even
if it should cost her her life.  She left the hut, went into
the midst of the forest, seated herself on a tree, and there
passed the night.  Next morning she went out and gathered starwort
and began to sew.  She could not speak to anyone, and she had
no inclination to laugh, she sat there and looked at nothing
but her work.

When she had already spent a long time there it
came to pass that the king of the country was hunting in the
forest, and his huntsmen came to the tree on which the maiden
was sitting.  They called to her and said, who are you.  But
she made no answer.  Come down to us, said they.  We will not
do you any harm.  She only shook her head.  As they pressed her
further with questions she threw her golden necklace down to
them, and thought to content them thus.  They, however, did
not cease, and then she threw her girdle down to them, and as
this also was to no purpose, her garters, and by degrees
everything that she had on that she could do without
until she had nothing left but her shift.

The huntsmen,
however, did not let themselves be turned aside by that, but
climbed the tree and fetched the maiden down and led her before
the king.  The king asked, who are you.  What are you doing on the
tree.  But she did not answer.  He put the question in every
language that he knew, but she remained as mute as a fish.  As
she was so beautiful, the king's heart was touched, and he was
smitten with a great love for her.  He put his mantle on her,
took her before him on his horse, and carried her to his
castle.  Then he caused her to be dressed in rich garments, and
she shone in her beauty like bright daylight, but no word
could be drawn from her.  He placed her by his side at table, and
her modest bearing and courtesy pleased him so much that he said,
she is the one whom I wish to marry, and no other woman in the
world.  And after some days he united himself to her.

The king, however, had a wicked mother who was dissatisfied
with this marriage and spoke ill of the young queen.  Who knows,
said she, from whence the creature who can't speak, comes.
She is not worthy of a king.  After a year had passed, when
the queen brought her first child into the world, the old
woman took it away from her, and smeared her mouth with blood
as she slept.  Then she went to the king and accused the queen
of being a man-eater.  The king would not believe it, and would
not suffer anyone to do her any injury.  She, however, sat
continually sewing at the shirts, and cared for nothing else.

The next time, when she again bore a beautiful boy, the false
mother-in-law used the same treachery, but the king could not
bring himself to give credit to her words.  He said, she is
too pious and good to do anything of that kind, if she were not
dumb, and could defend herself, her innocence would come to light.

But when the old woman stole away the newly-born child for the
third time, and accused the queen, who did not utter one word
of defence, the king could do no otherwise than deliver her over
to justice, and she was sentenced to suffer death by fire.

When the day came for the sentence to be carried out, it was
the last day of the six years during which she was not to speak
or laugh, and she had delivered her dear brothers from the
power of the enchantment.  The six shirts were ready, only the
left sleeve of the sixth was wanting.  When, therefore, she was
led to the stake, she laid the shirts on her arm, and when she
stood on high and the fire was just going to be lighted, she
looked around and six swans came flying through the air towards
her.  Then she saw that her deliverance was near, and her heart
leapt with joy.  The swans swept towards her and sank down so that
they were touched by them, their swans, skins fell off, and her
brothers stood in their own bodily form before her, and were
vigorous and handsome.  The youngest only lacked his left arm,
and had in the place of it a swan's wing on his shoulder.  They
embraced and kissed each other, and the queen went to the king,
who was greatly moved, and she began to speak and said, dearest
husband, now I may speak and declare to you that I am innocent,
and falsely accused.  And she told him of the treachery of the
old woman who had taken away her three children and hidden them.

Then to the great joy of the king they were brought thither,
and as a punishment, the wicked mother-in-law was bound to
the stake, and burnt to ashes.  But the king and the queen with
her six brothers lived many years in happiness and peace.
	Briar-Rose

A long time ago there were a king and queen who said every
day, ah, if only we had a child, but they never had one.  But
it happened that once when the queen was bathing, a frog
crept out of the water on to the land, and said to her, your
wish shall be fulfilled, before a year has gone by, you shall
have a daughter.

What the frog had said came true, and the queen had a little
girl who was so pretty that the king could not contain himself
for joy, and ordered a great feast.  He invited not only his
kindred, friends and acquaintances, but also the wise women, in
order that they might be kind and well-disposed towards the
child.  There were thirteen of them in his kingdom, but, as
he had only twelve golden plates for them to eat out of, one
of them had to be left at home.

The feast was held with all manner of splendor and when it
came to an end the wise women bestowed their magic gifts
upon the baby - one gave virtue, another beauty, a third
riches, and so on with everything in the world that one can
wish for.

When eleven of them had made their promises, suddenly the
thirteenth came in.  She wished to avenge herself for not
having been invited, and without greeting, or even looking
at anyone, she cried with a loud voice, the king's daughter
shall in her fifteenth year prick herself with a spindle, and fall
down dead.  And, without saying a word more, she turned round
and left the room.

They were all shocked, but the twelfth, whose good wish still
remained unspoken, came forward, and as she could not undo
the evil sentence, but only soften it, she said, it shall
not be death, but a deep sleep of a hundred years, into which
the princess shall fall.

The king, who would fain keep his dear child from the misfortune,
gave orders that every spindle in the whole kingdom should
be burnt.  Meanwhile the gifts of the wise women were plenteously
fulfilled on the young girl, for she was so beautiful, modest,
good-natured, and wise, that everyone who saw her was bound
to love her.

It happened that on the very day when she was fifteen years
old, the king and queen were not at home, and the maiden
was left in the palace quite alone.  So she went round into
all sorts of places, looked into rooms and bed-chambers just
as she liked, and at last came to an old tower.  She climbed
up the narrow winding-staircase, and reached a little door.
A rusty key was in the lock, and when she turned it the door
sprang open, and there in a little room sat an old woman with
a spindle, busily spinning her flax.

Good day, old mother, said the king's daughter, what are you
doing there.  I am spinning, said the old woman, and nodded
her head.  What sort of thing is that, that rattles round
so merrily, said the girl, and she took the spindle and wanted
to spin too.  But scarcely had she touched the spindle when the
magic decree was fulfilled, and she pricked her finger with it.

And, in the very moment when she felt the prick, she fell
down upon the bed that stood there, and lay in a deep sleep.
And this sleep extended over the whole palace, the king and
queen who had just come home, and had entered the great hall,
began to go to sleep, and the whole of the court with them.
The horses, too, went to sleep in the stable, the dogs in
the yard, the pigeons upon the roof, the flies on the wall,
even the fire that was flaming on the hearth became quiet
and slept, the roast meat left off frizzling, and the
cook, who was just going to pull the hair of the scullery boy,
because he had forgotten something, let him go, and went to
sleep.  And the wind fell, and on the trees before the
castle not a leaf moved again.

But round about the castle there began to grow a hedge of
thorns, which every year became higher, and at last grew
close up round the castle and all over it, so that there
was nothing of it to be seen, not even the flag upon the
roof.  But the story of the beautiful sleeping briar-rose,
for so the princess was named, went about the country,
so that from time to time kings' sons came and tried to
get through the thorny hedge into the castle.

But they found it impossible, for the thorns held fast
together, as if they had hands, and the youths were caught
in them, could not get loose again, and died a miserable
death.

After long, long years a king's son came again to that
country, and heard an old man talking about the thorn-hedge,
and that a castle was said to stand behind it in which a
wonderfully beautiful princess, named briar-rose, had been
asleep for a hundred years, and that the king and queen and
the whole court were asleep likewise.  He had heard, too,
from his grandfather, that many kings, sons had already come,
and had tried to get through the thorny hedge, but they had
remained sticking fast in it, and had died a pitiful death.

Then the youth said, I am not afraid, I will go and see
the beautiful briar-rose.  The good old man might dissuade him
as he would, he did not listen to his words.

But by this time the hundred years had just passed, and the
day had come when briar-rose was to awake again.  When the
king's son came near to the thorn-hedge, it was nothing but
large and beautiful flowers, which parted from each other of
their own accord, and let him pass unhurt, then they closed
again behind him like a hedge.  In the castle yard he saw the
horses and the spotted hounds lying asleep, on the roof sat
the pigeons with their heads under their wings.  And when he
entered the house, the flies were asleep upon the wall, the
cook in the kitchen was still holding out his hand to seize the
boy, and the maid was sitting by the black hen which she
was going to pluck.

He went on farther, and in the great hall he saw the whole of
the court lying asleep, and up by the throne lay the king and
queen.

Then he went on still farther, and all was so quiet that a breath
could be heard, and at last he came to the tower, and opened the
door into the little room where briar-rose was sleeping.

There she lay, so beautiful that he could not turn his eyes away,
and he stooped down and gave her a kiss.  But as soon as he
kissed her, briar-rose opened her eyes and awoke, and looked
at him quite sweetly.

Then they went down together, and the king awoke, and the
queen, and the whole court, and looked at each other in
great astonishment.  And the horses in the courtyard stood
up and shook themselves, the hounds jumped up and wagged their
tails, the pigeons upon the roof pulled out their heads from
under their wings, looked round, and flew into the open
country, the flies on the wall crept again, the fire in the
kitchen burned up and flickered and cooked the meat, the joint
began to turn and sizzle again, and the cook gave the boy such
a box on the ear that he screamed, and the maid finished
plucking the fowl.

And then the marriage of the king's son with briar-rose was
celebrated with all splendor, and they lived contented to the
end of their days.
There was once a forester who went into the forest to hunt,
and as he entered it he heard a sound of screaming as if a
little child were there.  He followed the sound, and at last
came to a high tree, and at the top of this a little child was
sitting, for the mother had fallen asleep under the tree with the
child, and a bird of prey had seen it in her arms, had flown down,
snatched it away, and set it on the high tree.

The forester climbed up, brought the child down, and thought to
himself, you will take him home with you, and bring him up with
your lina.  He took it home, therefore, and the two children grew
up together.  And the one, which he had found on a tree was called
fundevogel, because a bird had carried it away.  Fundevogel and
lina loved each other so dearly that when they did not see each
other they were sad.

Now the forester had an old cook, who one evening took two pails
and began to fetch water, and did not go once only, but many times,
out to the spring.  Lina saw this and said, listen old sanna, why
are you fetching so much water.  If you will never repeat it to
anyone, I will tell you why.  So lina said, no, she would never
repeat it to anyone, and then the cook said, early tomorrow
morning, when the forester is out hunting, I will heat the water,
and when it is boiling in the kettle, I will throw in fundevogel,
and will boil him in it.

Early next morning the forester got up and went out hunting, and
when he was gone the children were still in bed.  Then lina said
to fundevogel, if you will never leave me, I too will never
leave you.  Fundevogel said, neither now, nor ever will I leave
you.  Then said lina, then I will tell you.  Last night, old
sanna carried so many buckets of water into the house that I asked
her why she was doing that, and she said that if I would promise
not to tell anyone she would tell me, and I said I would be
sure not to tell anyone, and she said that early to-morrow morning
when father was out hunting, she would set the kettle full of
water, throw you into it and boil you, but we will get up quickly,
dress ourselves, and go away together.

The two children therefore got up, dressed themselves quickly, and
went away.  When the water in the kettle was boiling, the cook
went into the bed-room to fetch fundevogel and throw him into
it.  But when she came in, and went to the beds, both the children
were gone.  Then she was terribly alarmed, and she said to herself,
what shall I say now when the forester comes home and sees that
the children are gone.  They must be followed instantly to get
them back again.

Then the cook sent three servants after them, who were to run and
overtake the children.  The children, however, were sitting
outside the forest, and when they saw from afar the three servants
running, lina said to fundevoel, never leave me, and I will never
leave you.  Fundevogel said, neither now, nor ever.  Then said
lina, do you become a rose-tree, and I the rose upon it.  When
the three servants came to the forest, nothing was there but a
rose-tree and one rose on it, but the children were nowhere.

Then said they, there is nothing to be done here, and they went
home and told the cook that they had seen nothing in the forest
but a little rose-bush with one rose on it.  Then the old cook
scolded and said, you simpletons, you simpletons, you should have
cut the rose-bush in two, and have broken off the rose and brought
it home with you, go, and do it once.  They had therefore to go
out and look for the second time.  The children, however, saw them
coming from a distance.  Then lina said, fundevogel, never leave
me, and I will never leave you.  Fundevogel said, neither now,
nor ever.  Said lina, then do you become a church, and I'll be
the chandelier in it.  So when the three servants came,
nothing was there but a church, with a chandelier in it.  They
said therefore to each other, what can we do here, let us go home.

When they got home, the cook asked if they had not found them, so
they said no, they had found nothing but a church, and that
there was a chandelier in it.  And the cook scolded them and said,
you fools, why did you not pull the church to pieces, and bring
the chandelier home with you.  And now the old cook herself got
on her legs, and went with the three servants in pursuit of the
children.  The children, however, saw from afar that the three
servants were coming, and the cook waddling after them.  Then
said lina, fundevogel, never leave me, and I will never leave
you.  Then said fundevogel, neither now, nor ever.  Said lina,
be a fishpond, and I will be the duck upon it.  The cook,
however, came up to them, and when she saw the pond she lay
down by it, and was about to drink it up.  But the duck swam
quickly to her, seized her head in its beak and drew her into the
water, and there the old witch had to drown.  Then the
children went home together, and were heartily delighted, and
if they have not died, they are living still.
A king had a daughter who was beautiful beyond all measure,
but so proud and haughty withal that no suitor was good
enough for her.  She sent away one after the other, and
ridiculed them as well.

Once the king made a great feast and invited thereto, from far
and near, all the young men likely to marry.  They were all
marshalled in a row according to their rank and standing.  First
came the kings, then the grand-dukes, then the princes, the
earls, the barons, and the gentry.  Then the king's daughter was
led through the ranks, but to each one she had some objection
to make.  One was too fat, the wine-barrel, she said.  Another
was too tall, long and thin has little in.  The third was too
short, short and thick is never quick.  The fourth was too
pale, as pale as death.  The fifth too red, a fighting cock.
The sixth was not straight enough, a green log dried behind
the stove.

So she had something to say against each one, but she made
herself especially merry over a good king who stood quite
high up in the row, and whose chin had grown a little crooked.
Look, she cried and laughed, he has a chin like a thrush's
beak. And from that time he got the name of king thrushbeard.

But the old king, when he saw that his daugher did nothing
but mock the people, and despised all the suitors who were
gathered there, was very angry, and swore that she should have
for her husband the very first beggar that came to his doors.

A few days afterwards a fiddler came and sang beneath the
windows, trying to earn a few pennies.  When the king heard him
he said, let him come up.  So the fiddler came in, in his dirty,
ragged clothes, and sang before the king and his daughter, and
when he had ended he asked for a trifling gift.  The king said,
your song has pleased me so well that I will give you my
daughter there, to wife.

The king's daughter shuddered, but the king said, I have taken
an oath to give you to the very first beggar-man and I will keep
it.  All she could say was in vain.  The priest was brought,
and she had to let herself be wedded to the fiddler on the
spot.  When that was done the king said, now it is not proper
for you, a beggar-woman, to stay any longer in my palace, you may
just go away with your husband.

The beggar-man led her out by the hand, and she was obliged to
walk away on foot with him.  When they came to a large forest
she asked, to whom does that beautiful forest belong.  It
belongs to king thrushbeard.  If you had taken him, it would
have been yours.  Ah, unhappy girl that I am, if I had but taken
king thrushbeard.

Afterwards they came to a meadow, and she asked again, to whom
does this beautiful green meadow belong.  It belongs to king
thrushbeard.  If you had taken him, it would have been
yours.  Ah, unhappy girl that I am, if I had but taken king
thrushbeard.

Then they came to a large town, and she asked again, to whom
does this fine large town belong.  It belongs to king thrushbeard.
If you had taken him, it would have been yours.  Ah, unhappy
girl that I am, if I had but taken king thrushbeard.
It does not please me, said the fiddler, to hear you always
wishing for another husband.  Am I not good enough for you.

At last they came to a very little hut, and she said, oh
goodness.  What a small house.  To whom does this miserable,
tiny hovel belong.  The fiddler answered, that is my house and
yours, where we shall live together.

She had to stoop in order to go in at the low door.  Where are
the servants, said the king's daughter.  What servants, answered
the beggar-man.  You must yourself do what you wish to have done.
Just make a fire at once, and set on water to cook my supper,
I am quite tired.  But the king's daughter knew nothing about
lighting fires or cooking, and the beggar-man had to lend a
hand himself to get anything fairly done.  When they had
finished their scanty meal they went to bed.  But he forced
her to get up quite early in the morning in order to look after
the house.

For a few days they lived in this way as well as might be, and
came to the end of all their provisions.  Then the man said,
wife, we cannot go on any longer eating and drinking here and
earning nothing.  You must make baskets.  He went out, cut some
willows, and brought them home.  Then she began to make baskets,
but the tough willows wounded her delicate hands.

I see that this will not do, said the man.  You had better spin,
perhaps you can do that better.  She sat down and tried to spin,
but the hard thread soon cut her soft fingers so that the blood
ran down.  See, said the man, you are fit for no sort of work.
I have made a bad bargain with you.  Now I will try to make a
business with pots and earthenware.  You must sit in the
market-place and sell the ware.  Alas, thought she, if any of
the people from my father's kingdom come to the market and see
me sitting there, selling, how they will mock me.  But it was
of no use, she had to yield unless she chose to die of hunger.
For the first time she succeeded well, for the people were glad
to buy the woman's wares because she was good-looking, and
they paid her what she asked.  Many even gave her the money and
left the pots with her as well.  So they lived on what she had
earned as long as it lasted, then the husband bought a lot of
new crockery.  With this she sat down at the corner of the
market-place, and set it out round about her ready for sale.
But suddenly there came a drunken hussar galloping along, and
he rode right amongst the pots so that they were all broken into
a thousand bits.  She began
to weep, and did now know what to do for fear.  Alas, what will
happen to me, cried she.  What will my husband say to this.
She ran home and told him of the misfortune.  Who would seat
herself at a corner of the market-place with crockery, said
the man.  Leave off crying, I see very well that you cannot
do any ordinary work, so I have been to our king's palace and
have asked whether they cannot find a place for a kitchen-maid,
and they have promised me to take you.  In that way you will
get your food for nothing.

The king's daughter was now a kitchen-maid, and had to be at
the cook's beck and call, and do the dirtiest work.  In both her
pockets she fastened a little jar, in which she took home her
share of the leavings, and upon this they lived.

It happened that the wedding of the king's eldest son was to be
celebrated, so the poor woman went up and placed herself by
the door of the hall to look on.  When all the candles were lit,
and people, each more beautiful than the other, entered, and
all was full of pomp and splendor, she thought of her lot with
a sad heart, and cursed the pride and haughtiness which had
humbled her and brought her to so great poverty.

The smell of the delicious dishes which were being taken in
and out reached her, and now and then the servants threw her
a few morsels of them.  These she put in her jars to take home.

All at once the king's son entered, clothed in velvet and silk,
with gold chains about his neck.  And when he saw the
beautiful woman standing by the door he seized her by the hand,
and would have danced with her.  But she refused and shrank
with fear, for she saw that it was king thrushbeard, her
suitor whom she had driven away with scorn.  Her struggles
were of no avail, he drew her into the hall.  But the string
by which her pockets were hung broke, the pots fell down, the
soup ran out, and the scraps were scattered all about.  And
when the people saw it, there arose general laughter and
derision, and she was so ashamed that she would rather have
been a thousand fathoms below the ground.  She sprang to the
door and would have run away, but on the stairs a man caught
her and brought her back.  And when she looked at him it was
king thrushbeard again.  He said to her kindly, do not be
afraid, I and the fiddler who has been living with you in that
wretched hovel are one.  For love of you I disguised myself
so.  And I also was the hussar who rode through your crockery.
This was all done to humble your proud spirit, and to punish
you for the insolence with which you mocked me.

Then she wept bitterly and said, I have done great wrong, and
am not worthy to be your wife.  But he said, be comforted,
the evil days are past.  Now we will celebrate our wedding.
Then the maids-in-waiting came and put on her the most splendid
clothing, and her father and his whole court came and wished
her happiness in her marriage with king thrushbeard, and
the joy now began in earnest.  I wish you and I had been there
too.
	Snow White and the Seven Dwarfs

Once upon a time in the middle of winter, when the flakes of
snow were falling like feathers from the sky, a queen sat at
a window sewing, and the frame of the window was made of black
ebony.  And whilst she was sewing and looking out of the window
at the snow, she pricked her finger with the needle, and three
drops of blood fell upon the snow.  And the red looked pretty
upon the white snow, and she thought to herself, would that I had
a child as white as snow, as red as blood, and as black as the
wood of the window-frame.

Soon after that she had a little daughter, who was as white as
snow, and as red as blood, and her hair was as black as ebony,
and she was therefore called little snow-white.  And when the
child was born, the queen died.

After a year had passed the king took to himself another wife.
She was a beautiful woman, but proud and haughty, and she could
not bear that anyone else chould surpass her in beauty.  She
had a wonderful looking-glass, and when she stood in front of it
and looked at herself in it, and said,
          looking-glass, looking-glass, on the wall,
          who in this land is the fairest of all.

The looking-glass answered,
          thou, o queen, art the fairest of all.

Then she was satisfied, for she knew that the looking-glass spoke
the truth.

But snow-white was growing up, and grew more and more beautiful,
and when she was seven years old she was as beautiful as the day,
and more beautiful than the queen herself.  And once when the
queen asked her looking-glass,
          looking-glass, looking-glass, on the wall,
          who in this land is the fairest of all.

It answered,
          thou art fairer than all who are here, lady queen.
          But more beautiful still is snow-white, as I ween.

Then the queen was shocked, and turned yellow and green with
envy.  From that hour, whenever she looked at snow-white, her
heart heaved in her breast, she hated the girl so much.
And envy and pride grew higher and higher in her heart like a
weed, so that she had no peace day or night.  She called a
huntsman, and said, take the child away into the forest.  I will
no longer have her in my sight.  Kill her, and bring me back her
lung and liver as a token.  The huntsman obeyed, and took her away
but when he had drawn his knife, and was about to pierce
snow-white's innocent heart, she began to weep, and said, ah dear
huntsman, leave me my life.  I will run away into the wild forest,
and never come home again.

And as she was so beautiful the huntsman had pity on her and
said, run away, then, you poor child.  The wild beasts will soon
have devoured you, thought he, and yet it seemed as if a stone had
been rolled from his heart since it was no longer needful for
him to kill her.  And as a young bear just then came running by
he stabbed it, and cut out its lung and liver and took them to the
queen as proof that the child was dead.  The cook had to salt them,
and the wicked queen ate them, and thought she had eaten the lung
and liver of snow-white.

But now the poor child was all alone in the great forest, and so
terrified that she looked at all the leaves on the trees, and did
not know what to do.  Then she began to run, and ran over sharp
stones and through thorns, and the wild beasts ran past her, but
did her no harm.

She ran as long as her feet would go until it was almost evening,
then she saw a little cottage and went into it to rest herself.
Everything in the cottage was small, but neater and cleaner than
can be told.  There was a table on which was a white cover, and
seven little plates, and on each plate a little spoon, moreover,
there were seven little knives and forks, and seven little mugs.
Against the wall stood seven little beds side by side, and
covered with snow-white counterpanes.

Little snow-white was so hungry and thirsty that she ate some
vegetables and bread from each plate and drank a drop of wine
out of each mug, for she did not wish to take all from one only.
Then, as she was so tired, she laid herself down on one of the
little beds, but none of them suited her, one was too long,
another too short, but at last she found that the seventh one was
right, and so she remained in it, said a prayer and went to
sleep.

When it was quite dark the owners of the cottage came back.
They were seven dwarfs who dug and delved in the mountains for
ore.  They lit their seven candles, and as it was now light within
the cottage they saw that someone had been there, for everything
was not in the same order in which they had left it.

The first said, who has been sitting on my chair.
The second, who has been eating off my plate.
The third, who has been taking some of my bread.
The fourth, who has been eating my vegetables.
The fifth, who has been using my fork.
The sixth, who has been cutting with my knife.
The seventh, who has been drinking out of my mug.

Then the first looked round and saw that there was a little
hollow on his bed, and he said, who has been getting into my
bed.  The others came up and each called out, somebody has been
lying in my bed too.  But the seventh when he looked at his bed
saw little snow-white, who was lying asleep therein.  And he
called the others, who came running up, and they cried out with
astonishment, and brought their seven little candles and let the
light fall on little snow-white.  Oh, heavens, oh, heavens, cried
they, what a lovely child.  And they were so glad that they did
not wake her up, but let her sleep on in the bed.  And the
seventh dwarf slept with his companions, one hour with each, and
so passed the night.

When it was morning little snow-white awoke, and was frightened
when she saw the seven dwarfs.  But they were friendly and asked
her what her name was.  My name is snow-white, she answered.
How have you come to our house, said the dwarfs.  Then she told
them that her step-mother had wished to have her killed, but
that the huntsman had spared her life, and that she had run for
the whole day, until at last she had found their dwelling.

The dwarfs said, if you will take care of our house, cook, make
the beds, wash, sew and knit, and if you will keep everything neat
and clean you can stay with us and you shall want for nothing.
Yes, said snow-white, with all my heart.  And she stayed with
them.  She kept the house in order for them.  In the mornings
they went to the mountains and looked for copper and gold, in the
evenings they came back, and then their supper had to be ready.
The girl was alone the whole day, so the good dwarfs warned her
and said, beware of your step-mother, she will soon know that you
are here, be sure to let no one come in.

But the queen, believing that she had eaten snow-white's lung and
liver, could not but think that she was again the first and most
beautiful of all, and she went to her looking-glass and said,
looking-glass, looking-glass, on the wall,
          who in this land is the fairest of all.

And the glass answered,
          oh, queen, thou art fairest of all I see,
          but over the hills, where the seven dwarfs dwell,
          snow-white is still alive and well,
          and none is so fair as she.

Then she was astounded, for she knew that the looking-glass
never spoke falsely, and she knew that the huntsman had betrayed
her, and that little snow-white was still alive.

And so she thought and thought again how she might kill her,
for so long as she was not the fairest in the whole land, envy let
her have no rest.  And when she had at last thought of something
to do, she painted her face, and dressed herself like an old
pedlar-woman, and no one could have known her.  In this disguise
she went over the seven mountains to the seven dwarfs, and
knocked at the door and cried, pretty things to sell, very cheap,
very cheap.  Little snow-white looked out of the window and called
out, good-day my good woman, what have you to sell.  Good things,
pretty things, she answered, stay-laces of all colors, and she
pulled out one which was woven of bright-colored silk.  I may let
the worthy old woman in, thought snow-white, and she unbolted the
door and bought the pretty laces.  Child, said the old woman,
what a fright you look, come, I will lace you properly for once.
Snow-white had no suspicion, but stood before her, and let herself
be laced with the new laces.  But the old woman laced so quickly
and so tightly that snow-white lost her breath and fell down as
if dead.  Now I am the most beautiful, said the queen to herself,
and ran away.

Not long afterwards, in the evening, the seven dwarfs came home,
but how shocked they were when they saw their dear little snow-white
lying on the ground, and that she neither stirred nor
moved, and seemed to be dead.  They lifted her up, and, as they
saw that she was laced too tightly, they cut the laces, then she
began to breathe a little, and after a while came to life again.
When the dwarfs heard what had happened they said, the old
pedlar-woman was no one
else than the wicked queen, take care and let no one come in
when we are not with you.

But the wicked woman when she had reached home went in front
of the glass and asked,
          looking-glass, looking-glass, on the wall,
          who in this land is the fairest of all.

And it answered as before,
          oh, queen, thou art fairest of all I see,
          but over the hills, where the seven dwarfs dwell,
          snow-white is still alive and well,
          and none is so fair as she.

When she heard that, all her blood rushed to her heart with fear,
for she saw plainly that little snow-white was again alive.
But now, she said, I will think of something that shall really
put an end to you.  And by the help of witchcraft, which she
understood, she made a poisonous comb.  Then she disguised
herself and took the shape of another old woman.  So she went
over the seven mountains to the seven dwarfs, knocked at the
door, and cried, good things to sell, cheap, cheap.  Little
snow-white looked out and said, go away, I cannot let anyone come
in.  I suppose you can look, said the old woman, and pulled the
poisonous comb out and held it up.  It pleased the girl so well
that she let herself be beguiled, and opened the door.  When they
had made a bargain the old woman said, now I will comb you
properly for once.  Poor little snow-white had no suspicion, and
let the old woman do as she pleased, but hardly had she put the
comb in her hair than the poison in it took effect, and the girl
fell down senseless.  You paragon of beauty, said the wicked
woman, you are done for now, and she went away.

But fortunately it was almost evening, when the seven dwarfs
came home.  When they saw snow-white lying as if dead upon the
ground they at once suspected the step-mother, and they looked
and found the poisoned comb.  Scarcely had they taken it out when
snow-white came to herself, and told them what had happened.
Then they warned her once more to be upon her guard and to open
the door to no one.

The queen, at home, went in front of the glass and said,
          looking-glass, looking-glass, on the wall,
          who in this land is the fairest of all.

Then it answered as before,
          oh, queen, thou art fairest of all I see,
          but over the hills, where the seven dwarfs dwell,
          snow-white is still alive and well,
          and none is so fair as she.

When she heard the glass speak thus she trembled and shook
with rage.  Snow-white shall die, she cried, even if it costs me
my life.

Thereupon she went into a quite secret, lonely room, where no
one ever came, and there she made a very poisonous apple.
Outside it looked pretty, white with a red cheek, so that
everyone who saw it longed for it, but whoever ate a piece of it
must surely die.

When the apple was ready she painted her face, and dressed herself
up as a farmer's wife, and so she went over the seven
mountains to the seven dwarfs.  She knocked at the door.  Snow-white
put her head out of the window and said, I cannot let
anyone in, the seven dwarfs have forbidden me.  It is all the
same to me, answered the woman, I shall soon get rid of my apples.
There, I will give you one.

No, said snow-white, I dare not take anything.  Are you afraid
of poison, said the old woman, look, I will cut the apple in two
pieces, you eat the red cheek, and I will eat the white.  The
apple was so cunningly made that only the red cheek was
poisoned.  Snow-white longed for the fine apple, and when she saw
that the woman ate part of it she could resist no longer, and
stretched out
her hand and took the poisonous half.  But hardly had she a bit
of it in her mouth than she fell down dead.  Then the queen
looked at her with a dreadful look, and laughed aloud and said,
white as snow, red as blood, black as ebony-wood, this time the
dwarfs cannot wake you up again.

And when she asked of the looking-glass at home,
          looking-glass, looking-glass, on the wall,
          who in this land is the fairest of all.

And it answered at last,
          oh, queen, in this land thou art fairest of all.
Then her envious heart had rest, so far as an envious heart can
have rest.

The dwarfs, when they came home in the evening, found snow-white
lying upon the ground, she breathed no longer and was dead.
They lifted her up, looked to see whether they could find
anything poisonous, unlaced her, combed her hair, washed her
with water and wine, but it was all of no use, the poor child was
dead, and remained dead.  They laid her upon a bier, and all
seven of them sat round it and wept for her, and wept three days
long.

Then they were going to bury her, but she still looked as if she
were living, and still had her pretty red cheeks.  They said,
we could not bury her in the dark ground, and they had a
transparent coffin of glass made, so that she could be seen from
all sides, and they laid her in it, and wrote her name upon it
in golden letters, and that she was a king's daughter.  Then they
put the coffin out upon the mountain, and one of them always
stayed by it and watched it.  And birds came too, and wept for
snow-white, first an owl, then a raven, and last a dove.

And now snow-white lay a long, long time in the coffin, and she
did not change, but looked as if she were asleep, for she was as
white as snow, as red as blood, and her hair was as black as
ebony.

It happened, however, that a king's son came into the forest, and
went to the dwarfs, house to spend the night.  He saw the coffin
on the mountain, and the beautiful snow-white within it, and read
what was written upon it in golden letters.  Then he said to the
dwarfs, let me have the coffin, I will give you whatever you want
for it.  But the dwarfs answered, we will not part with it for all
the gold in the world.  Then he said, let me have it as a gift, for
I cannot live without seeing snow-white.  I will honor and prize
her as my dearest possession.  As he spoke in this way the good
dwarfs took pity upon him, and gave him the coffin.

And now the king's son had it carried away by his servants on
their shoulders.  And it happened that they stumbled over a
tree-stump, and with the shock the poisonous piece of apple
which snow-white had bitten off came out of her throat.  And
before long she opened her eyes, lifted up the lid of the coffin,
sat up, and was
once more alive.  Oh, heavens, where am I, she cried.  The king's
son, full of joy, said, you are with me.  And told her what had
happened, and said, I love you more than everything in the
world, come with me to my father's palace, you shall be my wife.

And snow-white was willing, and went with him, and their wedding
was held with great show and splendor.  But snow-white's
wicked step-mother was also bidden to the feast.  When she had
arrayed herself in beautiful clothes she went before the
looking-glass, and said,
          looking-glass, looking-glass, on the wall,
          who in this land is the fairest of all.

The glass answered,
          oh, queen, of all here the fairest art thou,
          but the young queen is fairer by far as I trow.

Then the wicked woman uttered a curse, and was so wretched,
so utterly wretched that she knew not what to do.  At first she
would not go to the wedding at all, but she had no peace, and
had to go to see the young queen.  And when she went in she
recognized snow-white, and she stood still with rage and fear,
and could not stir.  But iron slippers had already been put upon
the fire, and they were brought in with tongs, and set before
her.  Then she was forced to put on the red-hot shoes, and dance
until she dropped down dead.
There were once three brothers who had fallen deeper and deeper into
poverty, and at last their need was so great that they had to endure
hunger, and had nothing to eat or drink. Then said they, it cannot go
on like this, we had better go into the world and seek our fortune.
They therefore set out, and had already walked over many a long road
and many a blade of grass, but had not yet met with good luck.  One
day they arrived in a great forest, and in the midst of it was a
hill, and when they came nearer they saw that the hill was all
silver.  Then spoke the eldest, now I have found the good luck I
wished for, and I desire nothing more.  He took as much of the silver
as he could possibly carry, and then turned back and went home again.

But the two others said, we want something more from good luck than
mere silver, and did not touch it, but went onwards.  After they had
walked for two days longer without stopping, they came to a hill
which was all gold. The second brother stopped, took thought with
himself, and was undecided.  What shall I do, said he, shall I take
for myself so much of this gold, that I have sufficient for all the
rest of my life, or shall I go farther.  At length he made a
decision, and putting as much into his pockets as would go in, said
farewell to his brother, and went home.

But the third said, silver and gold do not move me, I will not
renounce my chance of fortune, perhaps something better still will be
given me.  He journeyed onwards, and when he had walked for three
days, he came to a forest which was still larger than the one before,
and never would come to an end, and as he found nothing to eat or to
drink, he was all but exhausted.  Then he climbed up a high tree to
find out if up there he could see the end of the forest, but so far
as his eye could pierce he saw nothing but the tops of trees.  Then
he began to descend the tree again, but hunger tormented him, and he
thought to himself, if I could but eat my fill once more.

When he got down he saw with astonishment a table beneath the tree
richly spread with food, the steam of which rose up to meet him.
This time, said he, my wish has been fulfilled at the right moment.
And without inquiring who had brought the food, or who had cooked it,
he approached the table, and ate with enjoyment until he had appeased
his hunger.  When he was done, he thought, it would after all be a
pity if the pretty little table-cloth were to be spoilt in the forest
here, and folded it up tidily and put it in his pocket.  Then he went
onwards, and in the evening, when hunger once more returned to him,
he wanted to make a trial of his little cloth, and spread it out and
said, I wish you to be covered with good cheer again, and scarcely
had the wish crossed his lips than as many dishes with the most
exquisite food on them stood on the table as there was room for.  Now
I perceive, said he, in what kitchen my cooking is done.  You shall
be dearer to me than the mountains of silver and gold.  For he saw
plainly that it was a wishing-cloth. The cloth, however, was still
not enough to enable him to sit down quietly at home, he preferred to
wander about the world and pursue his fortune farther.

One night he met, in a lonely wood, a dusty, black charcoal-burner,
who was burning charcoal there, and had some potatoes by the fire, on
which he was going to make a meal.  Good evening, blackbird, said the
youth.  How do you get on in your solitude.

One day is like another, replied the charcoal-burner, and every night
potatoes.  Have you a mind to have some, and will you be my guest.
Many thanks, replied the traveler, I won't rob you of your supper,
you did not reckon on a visitor, but if you will put up with what I
have, you shall have an invitation. Who is to prepare it for you,
said the charcoal-burner.  I see that you have nothing with you, and
there is no one within a two hours' walk who could give you anything.
And yet there shall be a meal, answered the youth, and better than
any you have ever tasted.  Thereupon he brought his cloth out of his
knapsack, spread it on the ground, and said, little cloth, cover
yourself, and instantly boiled meat and baked meat stood there, and
as hot as if it had just come out of the kitchen.

The charcoal-burner stared with wide-open eyes, but did not require
much pressing, he fell to, and thrust larger and larger mouthfuls
into his black mouth.  When they had eaten everything, the
charcoal-burner smiled contentedly, and said, listen, your
table-cloth has my approval, it would be a fine thing for me in this
forest, where no one ever cooks me anything good.  I will propose an
exchange to you, there in the corner hangs a soldier's knapsack,
which is certainly old and shabby, but in it lie concealed wonderful
powers, but, as I no longer use it, I will give it to you for the
table-cloth.

I must first know what these wonderful powers are, answered the
youth.

That will I tell you, replied the charcoal-burner, every time you tap
it with your hand, a corporal comes with six men armed from head to
foot, and they do whatsover you command them.  So far as I am
concerned, said the youth, if nothing else can be done, we will
exchange, and he gave the charcoal-burner the cloth, took the
knapsack from the hook, put it on, and bade farewell.  When he had
walked a while, he wished to make a trial of the magical powers of
his knapsack and tapped it.  Immediately the seven warriors stepped
up to him, and the corporal said, what does my lord and ruler wish
for.

March with all speed to the charcoal-burner, and demand my
wishing-cloth back.  They faced to the left, and it was not long
before they brought what he required, and had taken it from the
charcoal-burner without asking many questions.  The young man bade
them retire, went onwards, and hoped fortune would shine yet more
brightly on him.  By sunset he came to another charcoal-burner, who
was making his supper ready by the fire. If you will eat some
potatoes with salt, but with no dripping, come and sit down with me,
said the sooty fellow.

No, he replied, this time you shall be my guest, and he spread out
his cloth, which was instantly covered with the most beautiful
dishes.  They ate and drank together, and enjoyed themselves
heartily.  After the meal was over, the charcoal-burner said, up
there on that shelf lies a little old worn-out hat which has strange
properties - the moment someone puts it on, and turns it round on his
head, the cannons go off as if twelve were fired all together, and
they demolish everything so that no one can withstand them.  The hat
is of no use to me, and I will willingly give it for your tablecloth.

That suits me very well, he answered, took the hat, put it on, and
left his table-cloth behind him.  But hardly had he walked away than
he tapped on his knapsack, and his soldiers had to fetch the cloth
back again.  One thing comes on the top of another, thought he, and I
feel as if my luck had not yet come to an end.  Neither had his
thoughts deceived him.  After he had walked on for the whole of one
day, he came to a third charcoal-burner, who like the previous one,
invited him to potatoes without dripping.  But he let him also dine
with him from his wishing-cloth, and the charcoal-burner liked it so
well, that at last he offered him a horn for it, which had very
different properties from those of the hat.  The moment someone blew
it all the walls and fortifications fell down, and all towns and
villages became ruins.  For this he immediately gave the
charcoal-burner the cloth, but he afterwards sent his soldiers to
demand it back again, so that at length he had the knapsack, hat and
horn, all three.  Now, said he, I am a made man, and it is time for
me to go home and see how my brothers are getting on.

When he reached home, his brothers had built themselves a handsome
house with their silver and gold, and were living in clover. He went
to see them, but as he came in a ragged coat, with his shabby hat on
his head, and his old knapsack on his back, they would not
acknowledge him as their brother.  They mocked and said, you give out
that you are our brother who despised silver and gold, and craved for
something still better for himself.  Such a person arrives in his
carriage in full splendor like a mighty king, not like a beggar, and
they drove him out of doors.  Then he fell into a rage, and tapped
his knapsack until a hundred and fifty men stood before him armed
from head to foot.  He commanded them to surround his brothers,
house, and two of them were to take hazelsticks with them, and beat
the two insolent men until they knew who he was.

A violent disturbance broke out, people ran together, and wanted to
lend the two some help in their need, but against the soldiers they
could do nothing.  News of this at length came to the king, who was
very angry, and ordered a captain to march out with his troop, and
drive this disturber of the peace out of the town, but the man with
knapsack soon got a greater body of men together, who repulsed the
captain and his men, so that they were forced to retire with bloody
noses.  The king said, this vagabond is not brought to order yet, and
next day sent a still larger troop against him, but they could do
even less.  The youth set still more men against them, and in order
to be done the sooner, he turned his hat twice round on his head, and
heavy guns began to play, and the king's men were beaten and put to
flight.

And now, said he, I will not make peace until the king gives me his
daughter to wife, and I govern the whole kingdom in his name.  He
caused this to be announced to the king, and the latter said to his
daughter, necessity is a hard nut to crack.  What else is there for
me to do but what he desires.  If I want peace and to keep the crown
on my head, I must give you away.

So the wedding was celebrated, but the king's daughter was vexed that
her husband should be a common man, who wore a shabby hat, and put on
an old knapsack.  She longed to get rid of him, and night and day
studied how she could accomplished this.  Then she thought to
herself, is it possible that his wonderful powers lie in the
knapsack, and she feigned affection and caressed him, and when his
heart was softened, she said, if you would but lay aside that horrid
knapsack, it makes you look so ugly, that I can't help being ashamed
of you.  Dear child, said he, this knapsack is my greatest treasure,
as long as I have it, there is no power on earth that I am afraid of.
And he revealed to her the wonderful virtue with which it was
endowed.

Then she threw herself in his arms as if she were going to kiss him,
but cleverly took the knapsack off his shoulders, and ran away with
it.  As soon as she was alone she tapped it, and commanded the
warriors to seize their former master, and take him out of the royal
palace.  They obeyed, and the false wife sent still more men after
him, who were to drive him quite out of the country.  Then he would
have been ruined if he had not had the little hat.  And hardly were
his hands free before he turned it twice.  Immediately the cannon
began to thunder, and demolished everything, and the king's daughter
herself was forced to come and beg for mercy.  As she entreated in
such moving terms, and promised to better her ways, he allowed
himself to be persuaded and granted her peace.

She behaved in a friendly manner to him, and acted as if she loved
him very much, and after some time managed so to befool him, that he
confided to her that even if someone got the knapsack into his power,
he could do nothing against him so long as the old hat was still his.
When she knew the secret, she waited until he was asleep, and then
she took the hat away from him, and had it thrown out into the
street.  But the horn still remained to him, and in great anger he
blew it with all his strength.

Instantly all walls, fortifications, towns, and villages, toppled
down, and crushed the king and his daughter to death. And had he not
put down the horn and had blown just a little longer, everything
would have been in ruins, and not one stone would have been left
standing on another.  Then no one opposed him any longer, and he made
himself king of the whole country.
	Rumpelstiltskin

Once there was a miller who was poor, but who had a beautiful
daughter.  Now it happened that he had to go and speak to the
king, and in order to make himself appear important he said
to him, I have a daughter who can spin straw into gold.  The
king said to the miller, that is an art which
pleases me well, if your daughter is as clever as you say, bring
her to-morrow to my palace, and I will put her to the test.

And when the girl was brought to him he took her into a room
which was quite full of straw, gave her a spinning-wheel and a
reel, and said, now set to work, and if by to-morrow morning
early you have not spun this straw into gold during the night,
you must die.  Thereupon he himself locked up the room, and
left her in it alone.  So there sat the poor miller's daughter,
and for the life of her could not tell what to do, she had no
idea how straw could be spun into gold, and she grew more and
more frightened, until at last she began to weep.

But all at once the door opened, and in came a little man,
and said, good evening, mistress miller, why are you crying so.
Alas, answered the girl, I have to spin straw into gold, and I do
not know how to do it.  What will you give me, said the
manikin, if I do it for you.  My necklace, said the girl.  The
little man took the necklace, seated himself in front of the
wheel, and whirr, whirr, whirr, three turns, and the reel was
full, then he put another on, and whirr, whirr, whirr, three times
round, and the second was full too.  And so it went on until
the morning, when all the straw was spun, and all the reels
were full of gold.

By daybreak the king was already there, and
when he saw the gold he was astonished and delighted, but his
heart became only more greedy.  He had the miller's daughter
taken into another room full of straw, which was much larger,
and commanded her to spin that also in one night if she valued
her life.  The girl knew not how to help herself, and was
crying, when the door opened again, and the little man appeared,
and said, what will you give me if I spin that straw into gold
for you.  The ring on my finger, answered the girl.  The little
man took the ring, again began to turn the wheel, and by
morning had spun all the straw into glittering gold.

The king rejoiced beyond measure at the sight, but still he had
not gold enough, and he had the miller's daughter taken into
a still larger room full of straw, and said, you must spin this,
too, in the course of this night, but if you succeed, you shall
be my wife.

Even if she be a miller's daughter, thought he, I could not
find a richer wife in the whole world.

When the girl was alone the manikin came again for the third
time, and said, what will you give me if I spin the straw for
you this time also.  I have nothing left that I could give,
answered the girl.  Then promise me, if you should become queen,
to give me your first child.  Who knows whether that will
ever happen, thought the miller's daughter, and, not knowing
how else to help herself in this strait, she promised the
manikin what he wanted, and for that he once more spun the
straw into gold.

And when the king came in the morning, and found all as he
had wished, he took her in marriage, and the pretty miller's
daughter became a queen.

A year after, she brought a beautiful child into the world,
and she never gave a thought to the manikin.  But suddenly he
came into her room, and said, now give me what you promised.

The queen was horror-struck, and offered the manikin all the
riches of the kingdom if he would leave her the child.  But the
manikin said, no, something alive is dearer to me than all the
treasures in the world.  Then the queen began to lament and cry,
so that the manikin pitied her.  I will give you three days,
time, said he, if by that time you find out my name, then shall
you keep your child.

So the queen thought the whole night of all the names that
she had ever heard, and she sent a messenger over the country to
inquire, far and wide, for any other names that there might be.
When the manikin came the next day, she began with caspar,
melchior, balthazar, and said all the names she knew, one
after another, but to every one the little man said, that is not
my name.  On the second day she had inquiries made in the
neighborhood as to the names of the people there, and she
repeated to the manikin the most uncommon and curious.  Perhaps
your name is shortribs, or sheepshanks, or laceleg, but he
always answered, that is not my name.

On the third day the messenger came back again, and said, I
have not been able to find a single new name, but as I came to
a high mountain at the end of the forest, where the fox and the hare
bid each other good night, there I saw a little house, and
before the house a fire was burning, and round about the fire
quite a ridiculous little man was jumping, he hopped upon
one leg, and shouted -
          to-day I bake, to-morrow brew,
          the next I'll have the young queen's child.
          Ha, glad am I that no one knew
          that Rumpelstiltskin I am styled.

You may imagine how glad the queen was when she heard the
name.  And when soon afterwards the little man came in, and
asked, now, mistress queen, what is my name, at first she
said, is your name Conrad?  No.  Is your name Harry?  No.
Perhaps your name is Rumpelstiltskin?

The devil has told you that!  The devil has told you that, cried
the little man, and in his anger he plunged his right foot so
deep into the earth that his whole leg went in, and then in
rage he pulled at his left leg so hard with both hands that
he tore himself in two.
There was once upon a time a woman who was a real witch and had two
daughters, one ugly and wicked, and this one she loved because she
was her own daughter, and one beautiful and good, and this one she
hated, because she was her step-daughter.  The step-daughter once had
a pretty apron, which the other fancied so much that she became
envious, and told her mother that she must and would have that apron.
Be quiet, my child, said the old woman, and you shall have it.  Your
step-sister has long deserved death, to-night when she is asleep I
will come and cut her head off.  Only be careful that you are at the
far-side of the bed, and push her well to the front. It would have
been all over with the poor girl if she had not just then been
standing in a corner, and heard everything.

All day long she dared not go out of doors, and when bed-time had
come, the witch's daughter got into bed first, so as to lie at the
far side, but when she was asleep, the other pushed her gently to the
front, and took for herself the place at the back, close by the wall.
In the night, the old woman came creeping in, she held an axe in her
right hand, and felt with her left to see if anyone were lying at the
outside, and then she grasped the axe with both hands, and cut her
own child's head off.

When she had gone away, the girl got up and went to her sweetheart,
who was called roland, and knocked at his door.  When he came out,
she said to him, listen, dearest roland, we must fly in all haste.
My step-mother wanted to kill me, but has struck her own child.  When
daylight comes, and she sees what she has done, we shall be lost.
But, said roland, I counsel you first to take away her magic wand, or
we cannot escape if she pursues us.  The maiden fetched the magic
wand, and she took the dead girl's head and dropped three drops of
blood on the ground, one in front of the bed, one in the kitchen, and
one on the stairs. Then she hurried away with her lover.

When the old witch got up next morning, she called her daughter, and
wanted to give her the apron, but she did not come.  Then the witch
cried, where are you.  Here, on the stairs, I am sweeping, answered
the first drop of blood.  The old woman went out, but saw no one on
the stairs, and cried again, where are you.  Here in the kitchen, I
am warming myself, cried the second drop of blood.  She went into the
kitchen, but found no one.  Then she cried again, where are you.  Ah,
here in the bed, I am sleeping, cried the third drop of blood.  She
went into the room to the bed.  What did she see there.  Her own
child, whose head she had cut off, bathed in her blood.

The witch fell into a passion, sprang to the window, and as she could
look forth quite far into the world, she perceived her step-daughter
hurrying away with her sweetheart roland.  That shall not help you,
cried she, even if you have got a long way off, you shall still not
escape me.  She put on her many league boots, in which she covered an
hour's walk at every step, and it was not long before she overtook
them.  The girl, however, when she saw the old woman striding towards
her, changed, with her magic wand, her sweetheart roland into a lake,
and herself into a duck swimming in the middle of it.

 The witch placed herself on the shore, threw bread-crumbs in, and
went to endless trouble to entice the duck, but the duck did not let
herself be enticed, and the old woman had to go home at night as she
had come.  At this the girl and her sweetheart roland resumed their
natural shapes again, and they walked on the whole night until
daybreak.  Then the maiden changed herself into a beautiful flower
which stood in the midst of a briar hedge, and her sweetheart roland
into a fiddler.  It was not long before the witch came striding up
towards them, and said to the musician, dear musician, may I pluck
that beautiful flower for myself.

Oh, yes, he replied, I will play to you while you do it.  As she was
hastily creeping into the hedge and was just going to pluck the
flower, knowing perfectly well who the flower was, he began to play,
and whether she would or not, she was forced to dance, for it was a
magical dance.  The faster he played, the more violent springs was
she forced to make, and the thorns tore her clothes from her body,
and pricked her and wounded her till she bled, and as he did not
stop, she had to dance till she lay dead on the ground.

As they were now set free, roland said, now I will go to my father
and arrange for the wedding.  Then in the meantime I will stay here
and wait for you, said the girl, and that no one may recognize me, I
will change myself into a red stone land-mark.

Then roland went away, and the girl stood like a red land-mark in the
field and waited for her beloved.  But when roland got home, he fell
into the snares of another, who so fascinated him that he forgot the
maiden.  The poor girl remained there a long time, but at length, as
he did not return at all, she was sad, and changed herself into a
flower, and thought, someone will surely come this way, and trample
me down.

It befell, however, that a shepherd kept his sheep in the field, and
saw the flower, and as it was so pretty, plucked it, took it with
him, and laid it away in his chest.  From that time forth, strange
things happened in the shepherd's house.  When he arose in the
morning all the work was already done, the room was swept, the table
and benches cleaned, the fire on the hearth was lighted, and the
water was fetched, and at noon, when he came home, the table was
laid, and a good dinner served.  He could not conceive how this came
to pass, for he never saw a human being in his house, and no one
could have concealed himself in it.

He was certainly pleased with this good attendance, but still at last
he was so afraid that he went to a wise woman and asked for her
advice.  The wise woman said, there is some enchantment behind it,
listen very early some morning if anything is moving in the room, and
if you see anything, no matter what it is, throw a white cloth over
it, and then the magic will be stopped.

The shepherd did as she bade him, and next morning just as day
dawned, he saw the chest open, and the flower come out.  Swiftly he
sprang towards it, and threw a white cloth over it.  Instantly the
transformation came to an end, and a beautiful girl stood before him,
who admitted to him that she had been the flower, and that up to this
time she had attended to his housekeeping.  She told him her story,
and as she pleased him he asked her if she would marry him, but she
answered, no, for she wanted to remain faithful to her sweetheart
roland, although he had deserted her. Nevertheless, she promised not
to go away, but to continue keeping house for the shepherd.

And now the time drew near when roland's wedding was to be
celebrated, and then, according to an old custom in the country, it
was announced that all the girls were to be present at it, and sing
in honor of the bridal pair.  When the faithful maiden heard of this,
she grew so sad that she thought her heart would break, and she would
not go thither, but the other girls came and took her.  When it came
to her turn to sing, she stepped back, until at last she was the only
one left, and then she could not refuse.

But when she began her song, and it reached roland's ears, he sprang
up and cried, I know the voice, that is the true bride, I will have
no other.  Everything he had forgotten, and which had vanished from
his mind, had suddenly come home again to his heart.  Then the
faithful maiden held her wedding with her sweetheart roland, and
grief came to an end and joy began.
In olden times there was a king, who had behind his palace a
beautiful pleasure-garden in which there was a tree that bore golden
apples.  When the apples were getting ripe they were counted, but on
the very next morning one was missing.  This was told to the king,
and he ordered that a watch should be kept every night beneath the
tree.

The king had three sons, the eldest of whom he sent, as soon as night
came on, into the garden, but when midnight came he could not keep
himself from sleeping, and next morning again an apple was gone.

The following night the second son had to keep watch, but it fared no
better with him, as soon as twelve o'clock had struck he fell asleep,
and in the morning an apple was gone.

Now it came to the turn of the third son to watch, and he was quite
ready, but the king had not much trust in him, and thought that he
would be of less use even than his brothers, but at last he let him
go.  The youth lay down beneath the tree, but kept awake, and did not
let sleep master him.  When it struck twelve, something rustled
through the air, and in the moonlight he saw a bird coming whose
feathers were all shining with gold.

The bird alighted on the tree, and had just plucked off an apple,
when the youth shot an arrow at him.  The bird flew off, but the
arrow had struck his plumage, and one of his golden feathers fell
down.  The youth picked it up, and the next morning took it to the
king and told him what he had seen in the night.  The king called his
council together, and everyone declared that a feather like this was
worth more than the whole kingdom.  If the feather is so precious,
declared the king, one alone will not do for me, I must and will have
the whole bird.

The eldest son set out, and trusting to his cleverness thought that
he would easily find the golden bird.  When he had gone some distance
he saw a fox sitting at the edge of a wood so he cocked his gun and
took aim at him.  The fox cried, do not shoot me, and in return I
will give you some good counsel.  You are on the way to the golden
bird, and this evening you will come to a village in which stand two
inns opposite to one another.

One of them is lighted up brightly, and all goes on merrily within,
but do not go into it, go rather into the other, even though it looks
like a bad one.  How can such a silly beast give wise advice, thought
the king's son, and he pulled the trigger. But he missed the fox, who
stretched out his tail and ran quickly into the wood.

So he pursued his way, and by evening came to the village where the
two inns were, in one they were singing and dancing, the other had a
poor, miserable look.  I should be a fool, indeed, he thought, if I
were to go into the shabby tavern, and pass by the good one.  So he
went into the cheerful one, lived there in riot and revel, and forgot
the bird and his father, and all good counsels.

When many months had passed, and the eldest son did not come back
home, the second set out, wishing to find the golden bird.  The fox
met him as he had met the eldest, and gave him the good advice of
which he took no heed.  He came to the two inns, and his brother was
standing at the window of the one from which came the music, and
called out to him.  He could not resist, but went inside and lived
only for pleasure.

Again some time passed, and then the king's youngest son wanted to
set off and try his luck, but his father would not allow it. It is of
no use, said he, he will find the golden bird still less than his
brothers, and if a mishap were to befall him he knows not how to help
himself, he's not too bright at the best.  But at last, as he had no
peace, he let him go.

Again the fox was sitting outside the wood, and begged for his life,
and offered his good advice.  The youth was good-natured, and said,
be easy, little fox, I will do you no harm.  You shall not repent it,
answered the fox, and that you may get on more quickly, get up behind
on my tail.  And scarcely had he seated himself when the fox began to
run, and away he went over stock and stone till his hair whistled in
the wind.  When they came to the village the youth got off, he
followed the good advice, and without looking round turned into the
little inn, where he spent the night quietly.

The next morning, as soon as he got into the open country, there sat
the fox already, and said, I will tell you further what you have to
do.  Go on quite straight, and at last you will come to a castle, in
front of which a whole regiment of soldiers is lying, but do not
trouble yourself about them, for they will all be asleep and snoring.
Go through the midst of them staight into the castle, and go through
all the rooms, till at last you will come to a chamber where a golden
bird is hanging in a wooden cage.  Close by, there stands an empty
gold cage for show, but beware of taking the bird out of the common
cage and putting it into the fine one, or it may go badly with you.

With these words the fox again stretched out his tail, and the king's
son seated himself upon it, and away he went over stock and stone
till his hair whistled in the wind.

When he came to the castle he found everything as the fox had said.
The king's son went into the chamber where the golden bird was shut
up in a wooden cage, whilst a golden one stood by, and the three
golden apples lay about the room.  But, thought he, it would be
absurd if I were to leave the beautiful bird in the common and ugly
cage, so he opened the door, laid hold of it, and put it into the
golden cage.  But at the same moment the bird uttered a shrill cry.
The soldiers awoke, rushed in, and took him off to prison.  The next
morning he was taken before a court of justice, and as he confessed
everything, was sentenced to death.

The king, however, said that he would grant him his life on one
condition - namely, if he brought him the golden horse which ran
faster than the wind, and in that case he should receive, over and
above, as a reward, the golden bird.

The king's son set off, but he sighed and was sorrowful, for how was
he to find the golden horse.  But all at once he saw his old friend
the fox sitting on the road.  Look you, said the fox, this has
happened because you did not give heed to me.  However, be of good
courage.  I will give you my help, and tell you how to get to the
golden horse.  You must go straight on, and you will come to a
castle, where in the stable stands the horse.  The grooms will be
lying in front of the stable, but they will be asleep and snoring,
and you can quietly lead out the golden horse. But of one thing you
must take heed, put on him the common saddle of wood and leather, and
not the golden one, which hangs close by, else it will go ill with
you.  Then the fox stretched out his tail, the king's son seated
himself upon it, and away he went over stock and stone until his hair
whistled in the wind.

Everything happened just as the fox had said, the prince came to the
stable in which the golden horse was standing, but just as he was
going to put the common saddle upon him, he thought, such a beautiful
beast will be shamed if I do not give him the good saddle which
belongs to him by right.  But scarcely had the golden saddle touched
the horse than he began to neigh loudly. The grooms awoke, seized the
youth, and threw him into prison.

The next morning he was sentenced by the court to death, but the king
promised to grant him his life, and the golden horse as well, if he
could bring back the beautiful princess from the golden castle.

With a heavy heart the youth set out, yet luckily for him he soon
found the trusty fox.  I ought only to leave you to your ill-luck,
said the fox, but I pity you, and will help you once more out of your
trouble.  This road takes you straight to the golden castle, you will
reach it by eventide, and at night when everything is quiet the
beautiful princess goes to the bathing-house to bathe. When she
enters it, run up to her and give her a kiss, then she will follow
you, and you can take her away with you, only do not allow her to
take leave of her parents first, or it will go ill with you.

Then the fox stretched out his tail, the king's son seated himself
upon it, and away went the fox, over stock and stone, till his hair
whistled in the wind.

When he reached the golden castle it was just as the fox had said. He
waited until midnight, when everything lay in deep sleep, and the
beautiful princess was going to the bathing-house. Then he sprang out
and gave her a kiss.  She said that she would like to go with him,
but she asked him pitifully, and with tears, to allow her first to
take leave of her parents.  At first he withstood her prayer, but
when she wept more and more, and fell at his feet, he at last gave
in.  But no sooner had the maiden reached the bedside of her father
than he and all the rest in the castle awoke, and the youth was laid
hold of and put into prison.

The next morning the king said to him, your life is forfeited, and
you can only find mercy if you take away the hill which stands in
front of my windows, and prevents my seeing beyond it, and you must
finish it all within eight days.  If you do that you shall have my
daughter as your reward.

The king's son began, and dug and shoveled without stopping, but when
after seven days he saw how little he had done, and how all his work
was as good as nothing, he fell into great sorrow and gave up all
hope.  But on the evening of the seventh day the fox appeared and
said, you do not deserve that I should take my trouble about you, but
just go away and lie down to sleep, and I will do the work for you.

The next morning when he awoke and looked out of the window the hill
had gone.  The youth ran, full of joy, to the king, and told him that
the task was fulfilled, and whether he liked it or not, the king had
to hold to his word and give him his daughter.

So the two set forth together, and it was not long before the trusty
fox came up with them.  You have certainly got what is best, said he,
but the golden horse also belongs to the maiden of the golden castle.
How shall I get it, asked the youth. That I will tell you, answered
the fox, first take the beautiful maiden to the king who sent you to
the golden castle.  There will be unheard-of rejoicing, they will
gladly give you the golden horse, and will bring it out to you.
Mount it as soon as possible, and offer your hand to all in farewell,
last of all to the beautiful maiden.  And as soon as you have taken
her hand swing her up on to the horse, and gallop away, and no one
will be able to bring you back, for the horse runs faster than the
wind.

All was carried out successfully, and the king's son carried off the
beautiful princess on the golden horse.

The fox did not remain behind, and he said to the youth, now I will
help you to get the golden bird.  When you come near to the castle
where the golden bird is to be found, let the maiden get down, and I
will take her into my care.  Then ride with the golden horse into the
castle-yard, there will be great rejoicing at the sight, and they
will bring out the golden bird for you.  As soon as you have the cage
in your hand gallop back to us, and take the maiden away again.

When the plan had succeeded, and the king's son was about to ride
home with his treasures, the fox said, now you shall reward me for my
help.  What do you require for it, asked the youth.  When you get
into the wood yonder, shoot me dead, and chop off my head and feet.

That would be fine gratitude, said the king's son.  I cannot possibly
do that for you.

The fox said, if you will not do it I must leave you, but before I go
away I will give you a piece of good advice.  Be careful about two
things.  Buy no gallows'-flesh, and do not sit at the edge of any
well.  And then he ran into the wood.

The youth thought, that is a wonderful beast, he has strange whims,
who on earth would want to buy gallows'-flesh.  As for the desire to
sit at the edge of a well it has never yet occurred to me.

He rode on with the beautiful maiden, and his road took him again
through the village in which his two brothers had remained. There was
a great stir and noise, and, when he asked what was going on, he was
told that two men were going to be hanged.  As he came nearer to the
place he saw that they were his brothers, who had been playing all
kinds of wicked pranks, and had squandered all their wealth.  He
inquired whether they could not be set free.  If you will pay for
them, answered the people, but why should you waste your money on
wicked men, and buy them free. He did not think twice about it, but
paid for them, and when they were set free they all went on their way
together.

They came to the wood where the fox had first met them, and as it was
a hot day, but cool and pleasant within the wood, the two brothers
said, let us rest a little by the well, and eat and drink.  He
agreed, and whilst they were talking he forgot himself, and sat down
upon the edge of the well without thinking of any evil.  But the two
brothers threw him backwards into the well, took the maiden, the
horse, and the bird, and went home to their father.  Here we bring
you not only the golden bird, said they, we have won the golden horse
also, and the maiden from the golden castle.  Then was there great
joy, but the horse would not eat, the bird would not sing, and the
maiden sat and wept.

But the youngest brother was not dead.  By good fortune the well was
dry, and he fell upon soft moss without being hurt, but he could not
get out again.  Even in this strait the faithful fox did not leave
him, it came and leapt down to him, and upbraided him for having
forgotten its advice.  But yet I cannot give up, he said, I will help
you up again into daylight.  He bade him grasp his tail and keep
tight hold of it, and then he pulled him up. You are not out of all
danger yet, said the fox.  Your brothers were not sure of your death,
and have surrounded the wood with watchers, who are to kill you if
you let yourself be seen.  But a poor man was sitting upon the road,
with whom the youth changed clothes, and in this way he got to the
king's palace.

No one knew him, but the bird began to sing, the horse began to eat,
and the beautiful maiden left off weeping.  The king, astonished,
asked, what does this mean.  Then the maiden said, I do not know, but
I have been so sorrowful and now I am so happy.  I feel as if my true
bridegroom had come.  She told him all that had happened, although
the other brothers had threatened her with death if she were to
betray anything.

The king commanded that all people who were in his castle should be
brought before him, and amongst them came the youth in his ragged
clothes, but the maiden knew him at once and fell upon his neck.  The
wicked brothers were seized and put to death, but he was married to
the beautiful maiden and declared heir to the king.

But what happened to the poor fox.  Long afterwards the king's son
was once again walking in the wood, when the fox met him and said,
you have everything now that you can wish for, but there is never an
end to my misery, and yet it is in your power to free me, and again
he asked him with tears to shoot him dead and chop off his head and
feet.  So he did it, and scarcely was it done when the fox was
changed into a man, and was no other than the brother of the
beautiful princess, who at last was freed from the magic charm which
had been laid upon him.  And now they had all the happiness they
wanted as long as they lived.
There were once upon a time two brothers, one rich and the other
poor.  The rich one was a goldsmith and evil-hearted. The poor one
supported himself by making brooms, and was good and honorable.  He
had two children, who were twin brothers and as like each other as
two drops of water.  The two boys went in and out of the rich house,
and often got some of the scraps to eat.  It happened once when the
poor man was going into the forest to fetch brush-wood, that he saw a
bird which was quite golden and more beautiful than any he had ever
chanced to meet with.  He picked up a small stone, threw it at it,
and was lucky enough to hit it, but one golden feather only fell
down, and the bird flew away.  The man took the feather and carried
it to his brother, who looked at it and said, it is pure gold. And
gave him a great deal of money for it.  Next day the man climbed into
a birch-tree, and was about to cut off a couple of branches when the
same bird flew out, and when the man searched he found a nest, and an
egg lay inside it, which was of gold.  He took the egg home with him,
and carried it to his brother, who again said, it is pure gold, and
gave him what it was worth.  At last the goldsmith said, I should
indeed like to have the bird itself.  The poor man went into the
forest for the third time, and again saw the golden bird sitting on
the tree, so he took a stone and brought it down and carried it to
his brother, who gave him a great heap of gold for it.  Now I can get
on, thought he, and went contentedly home.

The goldsmith was crafty and cunning, and knew very well what kind of
a bird it was.  He called his wife and said, roast me the gold bird,
and take care that none of it is lost.  I have a fancy to eat it all
myself.  The bird, however, was no common one, but of so wondrous a
kind that whosoever ate its heart and liver found every morning a
piece of gold beneath his pillow.  The woman prepared the bird, put
it on the spit, and let it roast.  Now it happened that while it was
on the fire, and the woman was forced to go out of the kitchen on
account of some other work, the two children of the poor broom-maker
ran in, stood by the spit and turned it round once or twice.  And as
at that very moment two little bits of the bird fell down into the
pan, one of the boys said, we will eat these two little bits.  I am
so hungry, and no one will ever miss them.  Then the two ate the
pieces, but the woman came into the kitchen and saw that they were
eating something and said, what have you been eating.  Two little
morsels which fell out of the bird, answered they.  That must have
been the heart and the liver, said the woman, quite frightened, and
in order that her husband might not miss them and be angry, she
quickly killed a young cock, took out his heart and liver, and put
them beside the golden bird.  When it was ready, she carried it to
the goldsmith, who consumed it all alone, and left none of it.  Next
morning, however, when he felt beneath his pillow, and expected to
bring out the piece of gold, no more gold pieces were there than
there had always been.

The two children did not know what a piece of good-fortune had fallen
to their lot.  Next morning when they arose, something fell rattling
to the ground, and when they picked it up there were two gold pieces.
They took them to their father, who was astonished and said, how can
that have happened.  When next morning they again found two, and so
on daily, he went to his brother and told him the strange story.  The
goldsmith at once knew how it had happened, and that the children had
eaten the heart and liver of the golden bird, and in order to revenge
himself, and because he was envious and hard-hearted, he said to the
father, your children are in league with the evil one, do not take
the gold, and do not suffer them to stay any longer in your house,
for he has them in his power, and may ruin you likewise.  The father
feared the evil one, and painful as it was to him, he nevertheless
led the twins forth into the forest, and with a sad heart left them
there.

And now the two children ran about the forest, and sought the way
home again, but could not find it, and only lost themselves more and
more.  At length they met with a huntsman, who asked, to whom do you
children belong.  We are the poor broom-maker's boys, they replied,
and they told him that their father would not keep them any longer in
the house because a piece of gold lay every morning under their
pillows.  Come, said the huntsman, that is nothing so very bad, if at
the same time you remain honest, and are not idle.  As the good man
liked the children, and had none of his own, he took them home with
him and said, I will be your father, and bring you up till you are
big.  They learnt huntsmanship from him, and the piece of gold which
each of them found when he awoke, was kept for them by him in case
they should need it in the future.

When they were grown up, their foster-father one day took them into
the forest with him, and said, to-day shall you make your trial shot,
so that I may release you from your apprenticeship, and make you
huntsmen.  They went with him to lie in wait and stayed there a long
time, but no game appeared.  The huntsman, however, looked above him
and saw a covey of wild geese flying in the form of a triangle, and
said to one of them,  shoot me down one from each corner.  He did it,
and thus accomplished his trial shot.

Soon after another covey came flying by in the form of the figure
two, and the huntsman bade the other also bring down one from each
corner, and his trial shot was likewise successful.  Now, said the
foster-father, I pronounce you out of your apprenticeship.  You are
skilled huntsmen.  Thereupon the two brothers went forth together
into the forest, and took counsel with each other and planned
something.  And in the evening when they had sat down to supper, they
said to their foster-father, we will not touch food, or take one
mouthful, until you have granted us a request.  Said he, what, then,
is your request.  They replied, we have now finished learning, and we
must prove ourselves in the world, so allow us to go away and travel.
Then spoke the old man joyfully, you talk like brave huntsmen, that
which you desire has been my wish.  Go forth, all will go well with
you.  Thereupon they ate and drank joyously together.

When the appointed day came, their foster-father presented each of
them with a good gun and a dog, and let each of them take as many of
his saved-up gold pieces as he chose.  Then he accompanied them a
part of the way, and when taking leave, he gave them a bright knife,
and said, if ever you separate, stick this knife into a tree at the
place where you part, and when one of you returns, he will will be
able to see how his absent brother is faring, for the side of the
knife which is turned in the direction by which he went, will rust if
he dies, but will remain bright as long as he is alive.  The two
brothers went still farther onwards, and came to a forest which was
so large that it was impossible for them to get out of it in one day.
So they passed the night in it, and ate what they had put in their
hunting-pouches, but they walked all the second day likewise, and
still did not get out.  As they had nothing to eat, one of them said,
we must shoot something for ourselves or we shall suffer from hunger,
and loaded his gun, and looked about him.  And when an old hare came
running up towards them, he laid his gun on his shoulder, but the
hare cried,
     dear huntsman, do but let me live,
     two little ones to thee I'll give,
and sprang instantly into the thicket, and brought two young ones.

But the little creatures played so merrily, and were so pretty, that
the huntsmen could not find it in their hearts to kill them.  They
therefore kept them with them, and the little hares followed on foot.
Soon after this, a fox crept past.  They were just going to shoot it,
but the fox cried,
     dear hunstman, do but let me live,
     two little ones to thee I'll give.

He, too, brought two little foxes, and the huntsmen did not like to
kill them either, but gave them to the hares for company, and they
followed behind.  It was not long before a wolf strode out of the
thicket.  The huntsmen made ready to shoot him, but the wolf cried,
     dear huntsman, do but let me live,
     two little ones to thee I'll give.

The huntsman put the two wolves beside the other animals, and they
followed behind them.  Then a bear came who wanted to trot about a
little longer, and cried,
     dear huntsman, do but let me live,
     two little ones to thee I'll give.

The two young bears were added to the others, and there were already
eight of them.  Then who should come.  A lion came, and tossed his
mane.  But the huntsmen did not let themselves be frightened and
aimed at him likewise, but the lion also said,
     dear huntsman, do but let me live,
     two little ones to thee I'll give.

And he brought his little ones to them, and now the huntsmen had two
lions, two bears, two wolves, two foxes, and two hares, who followed
them and served them.  In the meantime their hunger was not appeased
by this, and they said to the foxes, listen you sneakers, provide us
with something to eat.  You are crafty and cunning.  They replied,
not far from here lies a village, from which we have already brought
many a fowl.  We will show you the way there.  So they went into the
village, bought themselves something to eat, had some food given to
their beasts, and then traveled onwards.  The foxes knew their way
very well about the district and where the poultry-yards were, and
were were able to guide the huntsmen.

Now they traveled about for a while, but could find no situation
where they could remain together, so they said, there is nothing else
for it, we must part.  They divided the animals, so that each of them
had a lion, a bear, a wolf, a fox, and a hare, then they took leave
of each other, promised to love each other like brothers till their
death, and stuck the knife which their foster-father had given them,
into a tree, after which one went east and the other went west.

The younger, however, arrived with his beasts in a town which was all
hung with black crape.  He went into an inn, and asked the host if he
could accommodate his animals.  The innkeeper gave him a stable,
where there was a hole in the wall, and the hare crept out and
fetched himself the head of a cabbage, and the fox fetched himself a
hen, and when he had devoured it got the cock as well, but the wolf,
the bear, and the lion could not get out because they were too big.
Then the innkeeper let them be taken to a place where a cow happened
to be lying on the grass, that they might eat till they were
satisfied.  And when the huntsman had taken care of his animals, he
asked the innkeeper why the town was thus hung with black crape.
Said the host, because our king's only daughter is to die to-morrow.
The huntsman inquired, is she sick unto death.  No, answered the
host, she is vigorous and healthy, nevertheless she must die.  How is
that, asked the huntsman.

There is a high hill without the town, whereon dwells a dragon who
every year must have a pure virgin, or he lays the whole country
waste, and now all the maidens have already been given to him, and
there is no longer anyone left but the king's daughter, yet there is
no mercy for her.  She must be given up to him, and that is to be
done to-morrow.  Said the huntsman, why is the dragon not killed.
Ah, replied the host, so many knights have tried it, but it has cost
all of them their lives.  The king has promised that he who conquers
the dragon shall have his daughter to wife, and shall likewise govern
the kingdom after his own death.

The huntsman said nothing more to this, but next morning took his
animals, and with them ascended the dragon's hill.  A little church
stood at the top of it, and on the altar three full cups were
standing, with the inscription.  Whosoever empties the cups will
become the strongest man on earth, and will be able to wield the
sword which is buried before the threshold of the door.  The huntsman
did not drink, but went out and sought for the sword in the ground,
but was unable to move it from its place.  Then he went in and
emptied the cups, and now he was strong enough to take up the sword,
and his hand could quite easily wield it.  As the hour came when the
maiden was to be delivered over to the dragon, the king, the marshal,
and courtiers accompanied her.  From afar she saw the huntsman on the
dragon's hill, and thought it was the dragon standing there waiting
for her, and did not want to go up to him, but at last, because
otherwise the whole town would have been destroyed, she was forced to
take the fatal journey.  The king and courtiers returned home full of
grief.  The king's marshal, however, was to stand still, and see all
from a distance.

When the king's daughter got to the top of the hill, it was not the
dragon which stood there, but the young huntsman, who comforted her,
and said he would save her, led her into the church, and locked her
in.  It was not long before the seven-headed dragon came thither with
loud roaring.  When he perceived the huntsman, he was astonished and
said, what business have you here on the hill.  The huntsman
answered, I want to fight with you.  Said the dragon,  many knights
have left their lives here, I shall soon have made an end of you too,
and he breathed fire out of seven jaws.

The fire was to have lighted the dry grass, and the huntsman was to
have been suffocated in the heat and smoke, but the animals came
running up and trampled out the fire.  Then the dragon rushed upon
the huntsman, but he swung his sword until it sang through the air,
and struck off three of his heads.  Then the dragon grew really
furious, and rose up in the air, and spat out flames of fire over the
huntsman, and was about to plunge down on him, but the huntsman once
more drew out his sword, and again cut off three of his heads.  The
monster became faint and sank down.

Nevertheless it was just able to rush upon the huntsman, when he with
his last strength smote its tail off, and as he could fight no
longer, called up his animals who tore it in pieces.  When the
struggle was ended, the huntsman unlocked the church, and found the
king's daughter lying on the floor, as she had lost her senses with
anguish and terror during the contest.  He carried her out, and when
she came to herself once more, and opened her eyes, he showed her the
dragon all cut to pieces, and told her that she was now set free. She
rejoiced and said, now you will be my dearest husband, for my father
has promised me to him who kills the dragon.  Thereupon she took off
her necklace of coral, and divided it amongst the animals in order to
reward them, and the lion received the golden clasp.  Her
pocket-handkerchief, however, on which was her name, she gave to the
huntsman, who went and cut the tongues out of the dragons, seven
heads, wrapped them in the handkerchief, and preserved them
carefully.

That done, as he was so faint and weary with the fire and the battle,
he said to the maiden, we are both faint and weary, we will sleep
awhile.  Then she said, yes, and they lay down on the ground, and the
huntsman said to the lion, you shall keep watch, that no one
surprises us in our sleep, and both fell asleep.  The lion lay down
beside them to watch, but he also was so weary with the fight, that
he called to the bear and said, lie down near me, I must sleep a
little.  If anything comes, waken me.  Then the bear lay down beside
him, but he also was tired, and called the wolf and said, lie down by
me, I must sleep a little, but if anything comes, waken me.  Then the
wolf lay down by him, but he was tired likewise, and called the fox
and said, lie down by me, I must sleep a little, if anything comes
waken me.  Then the fox lay down beside him, but he too was weary,
and called the hare and said, lie down near me, I must sleep a
little, and if anything should come, waken me.  Then the hare sat
down by him, but the poor hare was tired too, and had no one whom he
could call there to keep watch, and fell asleep.  And now the king's
daughter, the huntsman, the lion, the bear, the wolf, the fox, and
the hare, were all sleeping a sound sleep.  The marshal, however, who
was to look on from a distance, took courage when he did not see the
dragon flying away with the maiden, and finding that all the hill had
become quiet, ascended it.

There lay the dragon hacked and hewn to pieces on the ground, and not
far from it were the king's daughter and a huntsman with his animals,
and all of them were sunk in a sound sleep.  And as he was wicked and
godless he took his sword, cut off the huntsman's head, and seized
the maiden in his arms, and carried her down the hill.  Then she
awoke and was terrified, but the marshal said, you are in my hands,
you shall say that it was I who killed the dragon.

I cannot do that, she replied, for it was a huntsman with his animals
who did it.  Then he drew his sword, and threatened to kill her if
she did not obey him, and so compelled her that she promised it.
Then he took her to the king, who did not know how to contain himself
for joy when he once more looked on his dear child in life, whom he
had believed to have been torn to pieces by the monster.  The marshal
said to him, I have killed the dragon, and delivered the maiden and
the whole kingdom as well, therefore I demand her as my wife, as was
promised.  The king said to the maiden, is what he says true.  Ah,
yes, she answered, it must indeed be true, but I will not consent to
have the wedding celebrated until after a year and a day, for she
thought in that time she should hear something of her dear huntsman.

The animals, however, were still lying sleeping beside their dead
master on the dragon's hill, and there came a great bumble-bee and
lighted on the hare's nose, but the hare wiped it off with his paw,
and went on sleeping.  The bumble-bee came a second time, but the
hare again rubbed it off and slept on.  Then it came for the third
time, and stung his nose so that he awoke.  As soon as the hare was
awake, he roused the fox, and the fox, the wolf, and the wolf the
bear, and the bear the lion.  And when the lion awoke and saw that
the maiden was gone, and his master was dead, he began to roar
frightfully and cried, who has done that.  Bear, why did you not
waken me.  The bear asked the wolf, why did you not waken me.  And
the wolf the fox, why did you not waken me.  And the fox the hare,
why did you not waken me.  The poor hare alone did not know what
answer to make, and the blame rested with him.  Then they were just
going to fall upon him, but he entreated them and said, kill me not,
I will bring our master to life again.  I know a mountain on which a
root grows which, when placed in the mouth of anyone, cures him of
all illness and every wound.  But the mountain lies two hundred
hours, journey from here.

The lion said, in four-and-twenty hours must you have run thither and
have come back, and have brought the root with you. Then the hare
sprang away, and in four-and-twenty hours he was back, and brought
the root with him.  The lion put the huntsman's head on again, and
the hare placed the root in his mouth, and immediately everything
united together again, and his heart beat, and life came back.  Then
the huntsman awoke, and was alarmed when he did not see the maiden,
and thought, she must have gone away whilst I was sleeping, in order
to get rid of me.  The lion in his great haste had put his master's
head on the wrong way round, but the huntsman did not observe it
because of his melancholy thoughts about the king's daughter.  But at
noon, when he was going to eat something, he saw that his head was
turned backwards and could not understand it, and asked the animals
what had happened to him in his sleep.  Then the lion told him that
they, too, had all fallen asleep from weariness, and on awaking, had
found him dead with his head cut off, that the hare had brought the
life-giving root, and that he, in his haste, had laid hold of the
head the wrong way, but that he would repair his mistake.  Then he
tore the huntsman's head off again, turned it round, and the hare
healed it with the root.

The huntsman, however, was sad at heart, and traveled about the
world, and made his animals dance before people.  It came to pass
that precisely at the end of one year he came back to the same town
where he had rescued the king's daughter from the dragon, and this
time the town was gaily hung with red cloth.  Then he said to the
host, what does this mean.  Last year the town was all hung with
black crape, what means the red cloth to-day.  The host answered,
last year our king's daughter was to have been delivered over to the
dragon, but the marshal fought with it and killed it, and so
to-morrow their wedding is to be solemnized, and that is why the town
was then hung with black crape for mourning, and is to-day covered
with red cloth for joy.

Next day when the wedding was to take place, the huntsman said at
mid-day to the inn-keeper, do you believe, sir host, that I while
with you here to-day shall eat bread from the king's own table.

Nay, said the host, I would bet a hundred pieces of gold that that
will not come true.  The huntsman accepted the wager, and set against
it a purse with just the same number of gold pieces. Then he called
the hare and said, go, my dear runner, and fetch me some of the bread
which the king is eating.  Now the little hare was the lowest of the
animals, and could not transfer this order to any the others, but had
to get on his legs himself.  Alas. Thought he, if I bound through the
streets thus alone, the butchers, dogs will all be after me.  It
happened as he expected, and the dogs came after him and wanted to
make holes in his good skin.  But he sprang away, you have never seen
the like, and sheltered himself in a sentry-box without the soldier
being aware of it.  Then the dogs came and wanted to have him out,
but the soldier did not understand a jest, and struck them with the
butt-end of his gun, till they ran away yelling and howling.  As soon
as the hare saw that the way was clear, he ran into the palace and
straight to the king's daughter, sat down under her chair, and
scratched at her foot.  Then she said, will you get away, and thought
it was her dog.  The hare scratched her foot for the second time, and
she again said, will you get away, and thought it was her dog.  But
the hare did not let itself be turned from its purpose, and scratched
her for the third time.  Then she peeped down, and knew the hare by
its collar.

She took him on her lap, carried him into her chamber, and said, dear
hare, what do you want.  He answered, my master, who killed the
dragon, is here, and has sent me to ask for a loaf of bread like that
which the king eats.  Then she was full of joy and had the baker
summoned, and ordered him to bring a loaf such as was eaten by the
king.  The little hare said, but the baker must likewise carry it
thither for me, that the butchers, dogs may do no harm to me.  The
baker carried if for him as far as the door of the inn, and then the
hare got on his hind legs, took the loaf in his front paws, and
carried it to his master.  Then said the huntsman, behold, sir host,
the hundred pieces of gold are mine.  The host was astonished, but
the huntsman went on to say, yes, sir host, I have the bread, but now
I will likewise have some of the king's roast meat.

The host said, I should indeed like to see that, but he would make no
more wagers.  The huntsman called the fox and said, my little fox, go
and fetch me some roast meat, such as the king eats.

The red fox knew the byways better, and went by holes and corners
without any dog seeing him, seated himself under the chair of the
king's daughter, and scratched her foot.  Then she looked down and
recognized the fox by its collar, took him into her chamber with her
and said, dear fox, what do you want.  He answered, my master, who
killed the dragon, is here, and has sent me.  I am to ask for some
roast meat such as the king is eating.  Then she made the cook come,
who was obliged to prepare a roast joint, the same as was eaten by
the king, and to carry it for the fox as far as the door.  Then the
fox took the dish, waved away with his tail the flies which had
settled on the meat, and then carried it to his master.  Behold, sir
host, said the huntsman, bread and meat are here but now I will also
have proper vegetables with it, such as are eaten by the king.  Then
he called the wolf, and said, dear wolf, go thither and fetch me
vegetables such as the king eats.

Then the wolf went straight to the palace, as he feared no one, and
when he got to the king's daughter's parlor, he tugged at the back of
her dress, so that she was forced to look round.  She recognized him
by his collar, and took him into her chamber with her, and said, dear
wolf, what do you want.  He answered, my master, who killed the
dragon, is here, I am to ask for some vegetables, such as the king
eats.  Then she made the cook come, and he had to make ready a dish
of vegetables, such as the king ate, and had to carry it for the wolf
as far as the door, and then the wolf took the dish from him, and
carried it to his master.  Behold, sir host, said the huntsman, now I
have bread and meat and vegetables, but I will also have some pastry
to eat like that which the king eats.  He called the bear, and said,
dear bear, you are fond of licking anything sweet, go and bring me
some confectionery, such as the king eats.

The the bear trotted to the palace, and everyone got out of his way,
but when he went to the guard, they presented their muskets, and
would not let him go into the royal palace.  But he got up on his
hind legs, and gave them a few boxes on the ears, right and left,
with his paws, so that the whole watch broke up, and then he went
straight to the king's daughter, placed himself behind her, and
growled a little.  Then she looked behind her, knew the bear, and
bade him go into her room with her, and said, dear bear, what do you
want.  He answered, my master, who killed the dragon, is here, and I
am to ask for some confectionery such as the king eats.  Then she
summoned her confectioner, who had to bake confectionery such as the
king ate, and carry it to the door for the bear.  Then the bear first
licked up the comfits which had rolled down, and then he stood
upright, took the dish, and carried it to his master.  Behold, sir
host, said the huntsman, now I have bread, meat, vegetables and
confectionery, but I will drink wine also, and such as the king
drinks.  He called his lion to him and said, dear lion, you yourself
like to drink till you are tipsy, go and fetch me some wine, such as
is drunk by the king.

Then the lion strode through the streets, and the people fled from
him, and when he came to the watch, they wanted to bar the way
against him, but he did but roar once, and they all ran away.  Then
the lion went to the royal apartment, and knocked at the door with
his tail.  The the king's daughter came forth, and was almost afraid
of the lion, but she knew him by the golden clasp of her necklace,
and bade him go with her into her chamber, and said, dear lion, what
will you have.  He answered, my master, who killed the dragon, is
here, and I am to ask for some wine such as is drunk by the king.
Then she bade the cup-bearer be called, who was to give the lion some
wine like that which was drunk by the king.  The lion said, I will go
with him, and see that I get the right wine.  Then he went down with
the cup-bearer, and when they were below, the cup-bearer wanted to
draw him some of the common wine that was drunk by the king's
servants, but the lion said, stop, I will taste the wine first, and
he drew half a measure, and swallowed it down at one draught.  No,
said he, that is not right.  The cup-bearer looked at him askance,
but went on, and was about to give him some out of another barrel
which was for the king's marshal.  The lion said, stop, let me taste
the wine first, and drew half a measure and drank it.  That is
better, but still not right, said he.  Then the cup-bearer grew angry
and said, how can a stupid animal like you understand wine.  But the
lion gave him a blow behind the ears, which made him fall down by no
means gently, and when he had got up again, he conducted the lion
quite silently into a little cellar apart, where the king's wine lay,
from which no one ever drank.  The lion first drew half a measure and
tried the wine, and then he said, that may possibly be the right
sort, and bade the cup-bearer fill six bottles of it.  And now they
went upstairs again, but when the lion came out of the cellar into
the open air, he reeled here and there, and was rather drunk, and the
cup-bearer was forced to carry the wine as far as the door for him,
and then the lion took the handle of the basket in his mouth, and
took it to his master.  The huntsman said, behold, sir host, here
have I bread, meat, vegetables, confectionery and wine such as the
king has, and now I will dine with my animals, and he sat down and
ate and drank, and gave the hare, the fox, the wolf, the bear, and
the lion also to eat and to drink, and was joyful, for he saw that
the king's daughter still loved him.  And when he had finished his
dinner, he said, sir host, now have I eaten and drunk, as the king
eats and drinks, and now I will go to the king's court and marry the
king's daughter.

Said the host, how can that be, when she already has a betrothed
husband, and when the wedding is to be solemnized to-day.  Then the
huntsman drew forth the handerchief which the king's daughter had
given him on the dragon's hill, and in which were folded the
monster's seven tongues, and said, that which I hold in my hand shall
help me to do it.  Then the innkeeper looked at the handkerchief, and
said, whatever I believe, I do not believe that, and I am willing to
stake my house and courtyard on it.  The huntsman, however, took a
bag with a thousand gold pieces, put it on the table, and said, I
stake that on it.

Now the king said to his daughter, at the royal table, what did all
the wild animals want, which have been coming to you, and going in
and out of my palace.  She replied, I may not tell you, but send and
have the master of these animals brought, and you will do well.  The
king sent a servant to the inn, and invited the stranger, and the
servant came just as the huntsman had laid his wager with the
innkeeper.  Then said he, behold, sir host, now the king sends his
servant and invites me, but I do not go in this way.

And he said to the servant, I request the lord king to send me royal
clothing, and a carriage with six horses, and servants to attend me.
When the king heard the answer, he said to his daughter, what shall I
do.  She said, cause him to be fetched as he desires to be, and you
will do well.  Then the king sent royal apparel, a carriage with six
horses, and servants to wait on him.  When the huntsman saw them
coming, he said, behold, sir host, now I am fetched as I desired to
be, and he put on the royal garments, took the handerchief with the
dragon's tongues with him, and drove off to the king.  When the king
saw him coming, he said to his daughter, how shall I receive him.
She answered, go to meet him and you will do well.  Then the king
went to meet him and led him in, and his animals followed.  The king
gave him a seat near himself and his daughter, and the marshal, as
bridegroom, sat on the other side, but no longer knew the huntsman.
And now at this very moment, the seven heads of the dragon were
brought in as a spectacle, and the king said, the seven heads were
cut off the dragon by the marshal, wherefore to-day I give him my
daughter to wife.  The the huntsman stood up, opened the seven
mouths, and said, where are the seven tongues of the dragon.  Then
was the marshal terrified, and grew pale and knew not what answer he
should make, and at length in his anguish he said, dragons have no
tongues.  The huntsman said, liars ought to have none, but the
dragon's tongues are the tokens of the victor, and he unfolded the
handerchief, and there lay all seven inside it.  And he put each
tongue in the mouth to which it belonged, and it fitted exactly.

Then he took the handkerchief on which the name of the princess was
embroidered, and showed it to the maiden, and asked to whom she had
given it, and she replied, to him who killed the dragon. And then he
called his animals, and took the collar off each of them and the
golden clasp from the lion, and showed them to the maiden and asked
to whom they belonged.  She answered, the necklace and golden clasp
were mine, but I divided them among the animals who helped to conquer
the dragon.  Then spoke the huntsman, when I, tired of the fight, was
resting and sleeping, the marshal came and cut off my head.  Then he
carried away the king's daughter, and gave out that it was he who had
killed the dragon, but that he lied I prove with the tongues, the
handkerchief, and the necklace.

And then he related how his animals had healed him by means of a
wonderful root, and how he had traveled about with them for one year,
and had at length come there and had learnt the treachery of the
marshal by the inn-keeper's story.  Then the king asked his daughter,
is it true that this man killed the dragon.

And she answered, yes, it is true.  Now can I reveal the wicked deed
of the marshal, as it has come to light without my connivance, for he
wrung from me a promise to be silent.  For this reason, however, did
I make the condition that the marriage should not be solemnized for a
year and a day.  Then the king bade twelve councillors be summoned
who were to pronounce judgment on the marshal, and they sentenced him
to be torn to pieces by four bulls.

The marshal was therefore executed, but the king gave his daughter to
the huntsman, and named him his viceroy over the whole kingdom.  The
wedding was celebrated with great joy, and the young king caused his
father and his foster-father to be brought, and loaded them with
treasures.  Neither did he forget the inn-keeper, but sent for him
and said, behold, sir host, I have married the king's daughter, and
your house and yard are mine.

The host said, yes, according to justice it is so.  But the young
king said, it shall be done according to mercy, and told him that he
should keep his house and yard, and gave him the thousand pieces of
gold as well.

And now the young king and queen were thoroughly happy, and lived in
gladness together.  He often went out hunting because it was a
delight to him, and the faithful animals had to accompany him.  In
the neighborhood, however, there was a forest of which it was
reported that it was haunted, and that whosoever did but enter it did
not easily get out again.  But the young king had a great inclination
to hunt in it, and let the old king have no peace until he allowed
him to do so.  So he rode forth with a great following, and when he
came to the forest, he saw a snow-white hind, and said to his men,
wait here until I return, I want to hunt that beautiful creature, and
he rode into the forest after it, followed only by his animals.  The
attendants halted and waited until evening, but he did not return, so
they rode home, and told the young queen that the young king had
followed a white hind into the enchanted forest, and had not come
back again.  Then she was in the greatest concern about him.  He,
however, had still continued to ride on and on after the beautiful
wild animal, and had never been able to overtake it, when he thought
he was near enough to aim, he instantly saw it bound away into the
far distance, and at length it vanished altogether.  And now he
perceived that he had penetrated deep into the forest, and blew his
horn but he received no answer, for his attendants could not hear it.
And as night was falling, he saw that he could not get home that day,
so he dismounted from his horse, lighted himself a fire near a tree,
and resolved to spend the night by it.  While he was sitting by the
fire, and his animals also were lying down beside him, it seemed to
him that he heard a human voice.  He looked round, but could
perceived nothing.  Soon afterwards, he again heard a groan as if
from above, and then he looked up, and saw an old woman sitting in
the tree, who wailed unceasingly, oh, oh, oh, how cold I am.  Said
he, come down, and warm yourself if you are cold.  But she said, no,
your animals will bite me.  He answered, they will do you no harm,
old mother, do come down.  She, however, was a witch, and said, I
will throw down a wand from the tree, and if you strike them on the
back with it, they will do me no harm.  Then she threw him a small
wand, and he struck them with it, and instantly they lay still and
were turned into stone.  And when the witch was safe from the
animals, she leapt down and touched him also with a wand, and changed
him to stone.  Thereupon she laughed, and dragged him and the animals
into a vault, where many more such stones already lay.

As the young king did not come back at all, the queen's anguish and
care grew constantly greater.  And it so happened that at this very
time the other brother who had turned to the east when they
separated, came into the kingdom.  He had sought a situation, and had
found none, and had then traveled about here and there, and had made
his animals dance.  Then it came into his mind that he would just go
and look at the knife that they had thrust in the trunk of a tree at
their parting, that he might learn how his brother was.  When he got
there his brother's side of the knife was half rusted, and half
bright.  Then he was alarmed and thought, a great misfortune must
have befallen my brother, but perhaps I can still save him, for half
the knife is still bright.  He and his animals traveled towards the
west, and when he entered the gate of the town, the guard came to
meet him, and asked if he was to announce him to his consort the
young queen, who had for a couple of days been in the greatest sorrow
about his staying away, and was afraid he had been killed in the
enchanted forest.

The sentries, indeed, thought no otherwise than that he was the young
king himself, for he looked so like him, and had wild animals running
behind him.  Then he saw that they were speaking of his brother, and
thought, it will be better if I pass myself off for him, and then I
can rescue him more easily.  So he allowed himself to be escorted
into the castle by the guard, and was received with the greatest joy.
The young queen indeed thought that he was her husband, and asked him
why he had stayed away so long.  He answered, I had lost myself in a
forest, and could not find my way out again any sooner.  At night he
was taken to the royal bed, but he laid a two-edged sword between him
and the young queen, she did not know what that could mean, but did
not venture to ask.

He remained in the palace a couple of days, and in the meantime
inquired into everything which related to the enchanted forest, and
at last he said, I must hunt there once more.  The king and the young
queen wanted to persuade him not to do it, but he stood out against
them, and went forth with a larger following.  When he had got into
the forest, it fared with him as with his brother, he saw a white
hind and said to his men, stay here, and wait until I return, I want
to chase the lovely wild beast, and then he rode into the forest and
his animals ran after him.  But he could not overtake the hind, and
got so deep into the forest that he was forced to pass the night
there.  And when he had lighted a fire, he heard someone wailing
above him, oh, oh, oh, how cold I am.

Then he looked up, and the self-same witch was sitting in the tree.
Said he, if you are cold, come down, little old mother, and warm
yourself.  She answered, no, your animals will bite me. But he said,
they will not hurt you.  Then she cried, I will throw down a wand to
you, and if you smite them with it they will do me no harm.  When the
huntsman heard that, he had no confidence in the old woman, and said,
I will not strike my animals.  Come down, or I will fetch you.  Then
she cried, what do you want.  You shall not touch me.  But he
replied, if you do not come, I will shoot you.  Said she, shoot away,
I do not fear your bullets.

Then he aimed, and fired at her, but the witch was proof against all
leaden bullets, and laughed shrilly and cried, you shall not hit me.
The huntsman knew what to do, tore three silver buttons off his coat,
and loaded his gun with them, for against them her arts were useless,
and when he fired she fell down at once with a scream.  Then he set
his foot on her and said, old witch, if you do not instantly confess
where my brother is, I will seize you with both my hands and throw
you into the fire.  She was in a great fright, begged for mercy and
said, he and his animals lie in a vault, turned to stone.  Then he
compelled her to go thither with him, threatened her, and said, old
sea-cat, now you shall make my brother and all the human beings lying
here, alive again, or you shall go into the fire.  She took a wand
and touched the stones, and then his brother with his animals came to
life again, and many others, merchants, artisans, and shepherds,
arose, thanked him for their deliverance, and went to their homes.
But when the twin brothers saw each other again, they kissed each
other and rejoiced with all their hearts.  Then they seized the
witch, bound her and laid her on the fire, and when she was burnt the
forest opened of its own accord, and was light and clear, and the
king's palace could be seen at about the distance of a three hours,
walk.

Thereupon the two brothers went home together, and on the way told
each other their histories.  And when the younger said that he was
ruler of the whole country in the king's stead, the other observed,
that I remarked very well, for when I came to the town, and was taken
for you, all royal honors were paid me, the young queen looked on me
as her husband, and I had to eat at her side, and sleep in your bed.
When the other heard that, he became so jealous and angry that he
drew his sword, and struck off his brother's head.  But when he saw
him lying there dead, and saw his red blood flowing, he repented most
violently, my brother delivered me, cried he, and I have killed him
for it, and he bewailed him aloud.  Then his hare came and offered to
go and bring some of the root of life, and bounded away and brought
it while yet there was time, and the dead man was brought to life
again, and knew nothing about the wound.

After this they journeyed onwards, and the younger said, you look
like me, you have royal apparel on as I have, and the animals follow
you as they do me, we will go in by opposite gates, and arrive at the
same time from the two sides in the aged king's presence.  So they
separated, and at the same time came the watchmen from the one door
and from the other, and announced that the young king and the animals
had returned from the chase.

The king said, it is not possible, the gates lie quite a mile apart.
In the meantime, however, the two brothers entered the courtyard of
the palace from opposite sides, and both mounted the steps. Then the
king said to the daughter, say which is your husband.

Each of them looks exactly like the other, I cannot tell.  Then she
was in great distress, and could not tell, but at last she remembered
the necklace which she had given to the animals, and she sought for
and found her little golden clasp on the lion, and she cried in her
delight, he who is followed by this lion is my true husband.  Then
the young king laughed and said, yes, he is the right one, and they
sat down together to table, and ate and drank, and were merry.  At
night when the young king went to bed, his wife said, why have you
for these last nights always laid a two-edged sword in our bed.  I
thought you had a wish to kill me.  Then he knew how true his brother
had been.

Two kings' sons once went out in search of adventures, and fell into
a wild, disorderly way of living, so that they never came home again.
The youngest, who was called simpleton, set out to seek his brothers,
but when at length he found them they mocked him for thinking that he
with his simplicity could get through the world, when they two could
not make their way, and yet were so much cleverer.

They all three traveled away together, and came to an ant-hill.  The
two elder wanted to destroy it, to see the little ants creeping about
in their terror, and carrying their eggs away, but simpleton said,
leave the creatures in peace, I will not allow you to disturb them.

Then they went onwards and came to a lake, on which a great number of
ducks were swimming.  The two brothers wanted to catch a couple and
roast them, but simpleton would not permit it, and said, leave the
creatures in peace, I will not suffer you to kill them.

At length they came to a bee's nest, in which there was so much honey
that it ran out of the trunk of the tree where it was.  The two
wanted to make a fire beneath the tree, and suffocate the bees in
order to take away the honey, but simpleton again stopped them and
said, leave the creatures in peace, I will not allow you to burn
them.

At length the three brothers arrived at a castle where stone horses
were standing in the stables, and no human being was to be seen, and
they went through all the halls until, quite at the end, they came to
a door in which were three locks.  In the middle of the door,
however, there was a little pane, through which they could see into
the room.  There they saw a little grey man, who was sitting at a
table.  They called him, once, twice, but he did not hear, at last
they called him for the third time, when he got up, opened the locks,
and came out.  He said nothing, however, but conducted them to a
handsomely-spread table, and when they had eaten and drunk, he took
each of them to a bedroom.

Next morning the little grey man came to the eldest, beckoned to him,
and conducted him to a stone table, on which were inscribed three
tasks, by the performance of which the castle could be delivered from
enchantment.

The first was that in the forest, beneath the moss, lay the
princess's pearls, a thousand in number, which must be picked up, and
if by sunset one single pearl was missing, he who had looked for them
would be turned into stone.  The eldest went thither, and sought the
whole day, but when it came to an end, he had only found one hundred,
and what was written on the table came true, and he was turned into
stone. Next day, the second brother undertook the adventure, but it
did not fare much better with him than with the eldest, he did not
find more than two hundred pearls, and was changed to stone.  At last
it was simpleton's turn to seek in the moss, but it was so difficult
for him to find the pearls, and he got on so slowly, that he seated
himself on a stone, and wept.  And while he was thus sitting, the
king of the ants whose life he had once saved, came with five
thousand ants, and before long the little creatures had got all the
pearls together, and laid them in a heap.

The second task, however, was to fetch out of the lake the key of the
king's daughter's bed-chamber.  When simpleton came to the lake, the
ducks which he had saved, swam up to him, dived down, and brought the
key out of the water.

But the third task was the most difficult, from amongst the three
sleeping daughters of the king was the youngest and dearest to be
sought out.  They, however, resembled each other exactly, and were
only to be distinguished by their having eaten different sweetmeats
before they fell asleep, the eldest a bit of sugar, the second a
little syrup, and the youngest a spoonful of honey.

Then the queen of the bees, whom simpleton had protected from the
fire, came and tasted the lips of all three, and at last she remained
sitting on the mouth which had eaten honey, and thus the king's son
recognized the right princess.  Then the enchantment was at an end,
everything was delivered from sleep, and those who had been turned to
stone received once more their natural forms.

Simpleton married the youngest and sweetest princess, and after her
father's death became king, and his two brothers received the two
other sisters.
There was once upon a time a king who had three sons, of whom two
were clever and wise, but the third did not speak much, and was
simple, and was called the simpleton.  When the king had become old
and weak, and was thinking of his end, he did not know which of his
sons should inherit the kingdom after him.  Then he said to them, go
forth, and he who brings me the most beautiful carpet shall be king
after my death.

And that there should be no dispute amongst them, he took them
outside his castle, blew three feathers in the air, and said, you
shall go as they fly.  One feather flew to the east, the other to the
west, but the third flew straight up and did not fly far, but soon
fell to the ground.

And now one brother went to the right, and the other to the left, and
they mocked simpleton, who was forced to stay where the third feather
had fallen.  He sat down and was sad.  Then all at once he saw that
there was a trap-door close by the feather.  He raised it up, found
some steps, and went down them.  Then he came to another door,
knocked at it, and heard somebody inside calling -
          little green waiting-maid,
          waiting-maid with the limping leg,
          little dog of the limping leg,
          hop hither and thither,
          and quickly see who is without.

The door opened, and he saw a great, fat toad sitting, and round
about her a crowd of little toads.  The fat toad asked what he
wanted.  He answered, I should like to have the prettiest and finest
carpet in the world.  Then she called a young one and said -
          little green waiting-maid,
          waiting-maid with the limping leg,
          little dog of the limping leg,
          hop hither and thither,
          and bring me the great box.

The young toad brought the box, and the fat toad opened it, and gave
simpleton a carpet out of it, so beautiful and so fine, that on the
earth above, none could have been woven like it.  Then he thanked
her, and climbed out again.

The two others, however, had looked on their youngest brother as so
stupid that they believed he would find and bring nothing at all.
Why should we give ourselves a great deal of trouble searching, said
they, and got some coarse handkerchiefs from the first shepherds'
wives whom they met, and carried them home to the king.

At the same time simpleton also came back, and brought his beautiful
carpet, and when the king saw it he was astonished, and said, if
justice be done, the kingdom belongs to the youngest.  But the two
others let their father have no peace, and said that it was
impossible that simpleton, who in everything lacked understanding,
should be king, and entreated him to make a new agreement with them.
Then the father said, he who brings me the most beautiful ring shall
inherit the kingdom, and led the three brothers out, and blew into
the air three feathers, which they were to follow.  Those of the two
eldest again went east and west, and simpleton's feather flew
straight up, and fell down near the door into the earth.

Then he went down again to the fat toad, and told her that he wanted
the most beautiful ring.  She at once ordered her big box to be
brought, and gave him a ring out of it, which sparkled with jewels,
and was so beautiful that no goldsmith on earth would have been able
to make it.

The two eldest laughed at simpleton for going to seek a golden ring.
They gave themselves no trouble, but knocked the nails out of an old
carriage-ring, and took it to the king, but when simpleton produced
his golden ring, his father again said, the kingdom belongs to him.
The two eldest did not cease from tormenting the king until he made a
third condition, and declared that the one who brought the most
beautiful woman home, should have the kingdom.  He again blew the
three feathers into the air, and they flew as before.

Then simpleton without more ado went down to the fat toad, and said,
I am to take home the most beautiful woman.  Oh, answered the toad,
the most beautiful woman.  She is not at hand at the moment, but
still you shall have her.  She gave him a yellow turnip which had
been hollowed out, to which six mice were harnessed.  Then simpleton
said quite mournfully, what am I to do with that.  The toad answered,
just put one of my little toads into it.  Then he seized one at
random out of the circle, and put her into the yellow coach, but
hardly was she seated inside it than she turned into a wonderfully
beautiful maiden, and the turnip into a coach, and the six mice into
horses.  So he kissed her, and drove off quickly with the horses, and
took her to the king.

His brothers, who came afterwards, had given themselves no trouble at
all looking for beautiful girls, but had brought with them the first
peasant women they chanced to meet.  When the king saw them he said,
after my death the kingdom belongs to my youngest son.  But the two
eldest deafened the king's ears afresh with their clamor, we cannot
consent to simpleton's being king, and demanded that the one whose
wife could leap through a ring which hung in the centre of the hall
should have the preference.  They thought, the peasant women can do
that easily, they are strong enough, but the delicate maiden will
jump herself to death.

The aged king agreed likewise to this.  Then the two peasant women
jumped, and jumped through the ring, but were so clumsy that they
fell, and their coarse arms and legs broke in two.  And then the
pretty maiden whom simpleton had brought with him, sprang, and sprang
through as lightly as a deer, and all opposition had to cease. So he
received the crown, and has ruled wisely for a length of time.
There was a man who had three sons, the youngest of whom was called
Dummling, and was despised, mocked, and sneered at on every occasion.

It happened that the eldest wanted to go into the forest to hew wood,
and before he went his mother gave him a beautiful sweet cake and a
bottle of wine in order that he might not suffer from hunger or
thirst.

When he entered the forest he met a little grey-haired old man who
bade him good-day, and said, do give me a piece of cake out of your
pocket, and let me have a draught of your wine, I am so hungry and
thirsty.  But the clever son answered, if I give you my cake and
wine, I shall have none for myself, be off with you, and he left the
little man standing and went on.

But when he began to hew down a tree, it was not long before he made
a false stroke, and the axe cut him in the arm, so that he had to go
home and have it bound up.  And this was the little grey man's doing.

After this the second son went into the forest, and his mother gave
him, like the eldest, a cake and a bottle of wine.  The little old
grey man met him likewise, and asked him for a piece of cake and a
drink of wine.  But the second son, too, said sensibly enough, what I
give you will be taken away from myself, be off, and he left the
little man standing and went on.  His punishment, however, was not
delayed, when he had made a few blows at the tree he struck himself
in the leg, so that he had to be carried home.

Then Dummling said, father, do let me go and cut wood.  The father
answered, your brothers have hurt themselves with it, leave it alone,
you do not understand anything about it.  But Dummling begged so long
that at last he said, just go then, you will get wiser by hurting
yourself.  His mother gave him a cake made with water and baked in
the cinders, and with it a bottle of sour beer.

When he came to the forest the little old grey man met him likewise,
and greeting him, said, give me a piece of your cake and a drink out
of your bottle, I am so hungry and thirsty.

Dummling answered, I have only cinder-cake and sour beer, if that
pleases you, we will sit down and eat.  So they sat down, and when
Dummling pulled out his cinder-cake, it was a fine sweet cake, and
the sour beer had become good wine.  So they ate and drank, and after
that the little man said, since you have a good heart, and are
willing to divide what you have, I will give you good luck. There
stands an old tree, cut it down, and you will find something at the
roots.  Then the little man took leave of him.

Dummling went and cut down the tree, and when it fell there was a
goose sitting in the roots with feathers of pure gold. He lifted her
up, and taking her with him, went to an inn where he thought he would
stay the night.  Now the host had three daughters, who saw the goose
and were curious to know what such a wonderful bird might be, and
would have liked to have one of its golden feathers.

The eldest thought, I shall soon find an opportunity of pulling out a
feather, and as soon as Dummling had gone out she seized the goose by
the wing, but her finger and hand remained sticking fast to it.

The second came soon afterwards, thinking only of how she might get a
feather for herself, but she had scarcely touched her sister than she
was held fast.

At last the third also came with the like intent, and the others
screamed out, keep away, for goodness, sake keep away.  But she did
not understand why she was to keep away.  The others are there, she
thought, I may as well be there too, and ran to them, but as soon as
she had touched her sister, she remained sticking fast to her.  So
they had to spend the night with the goose.

The next morning Dummling took the goose under his arm and set out,
without troubling himself about the three girls who were hanging on
to it.  They were obliged to run after him continually, now left, now
right, wherever his legs took him.

In the middle of the fields the parson met them, and when he saw the
procession he said, for shame, you good-for-nothing girls, why are
you running across the fields after this young man.  Is that seemly?
At the same time he seized the youngest by the hand in order to pull
her away, but as soon as he touched her he likewise stuck fast, and
was himself obliged to run behind.

Before long the sexton came by and saw his master, the parson,
running behind three girls.  He was astonished at this and called
out, hi, your reverence, whither away so quickly.  Do not forget that
we have a christening to-day, and running after him he took him by
the sleeve, but was also held fast to it. Whilst the five were
trotting thus one behind the other, two laborers came with their hoes
from the fields, the parson called out to them and begged that they
would set him and the sexton free.  But they had scarcely touched the
sexton when they were held fast, and now there were seven of them
running behind Dummling and the goose.

Soon afterwards he came to a city, where a king ruled who had a
daughter who was so serious that no one could make her laugh.  So he
had put forth a decree that whosoever should be able to make her
laugh should marry her.  When Dummling heard this, he went with his
goose and all her train before the king's daughter, and as soon as
she saw the seven people running on and on, one behind the other, she
began to laugh quite loudly, and as if she would never stop.

Thereupon Dummling asked to have her for his wife, but the king did
not like the son-in-law, and made all manner of excuses and said he
must first produce a man who could drink a cellarful of wine.

Dummling thought of the little grey man, who could certainly help
him, so he went into the forest, and in the same place where he had
felled the tree, he saw a man sitting, who had a very sorrowful face.
Dummling asked him what he was taking to heart so sorely, and he
answered, I have such a great thirst and cannot quench it, cold water
I cannot stand, a barrel of wine I have just emptied, but that to me
is like a drop on a hot stone.

There, I can help you, said Dummling, just come with me and you shall
be satisfied.

He led him into the king's cellar, and the man bent over the huge
barrels, and drank and drank till his loins hurt, and before the day
was out he had emptied all the barrels.  Then Dummling asked once
more for his bride, but the king was vexed that such an ugly fellow,
whom everyone called Dummling, should take away his daughter, and he
made a new condition, he must first find a man who could eat a whole
mountain of bread.  Dummling did not think long, but went straight
into the forest, where in the same place there sat a man who was
tying up his body with a strap, and making an awful face, and saying,
I have eaten a whole ovenful of rolls, but what good is that when one
has such a hunger as I.  My stomach remains empty, and I must tie
myself up if I am not to die of hunger.

At this Dummling was glad, and said, get up and come with me, you
shall eat yourself full.  He led him to the king's palace, where all
the flour in the whole kingdom was collected, and from it he caused a
huge mountain of bread to be baked.  The man from the forest stood
before it, began to eat, and by the end of one day the whole mountain
had vanished.  Then Dummling for the third time asked for his bride,
but the king again sought a way out, and ordered a ship which could
sail on land and on water.  As soon as you come sailing back in it,
said he, you shall have my daughter for wife.

Dummling went straight into the forest, and there sat the little grey
man to whom he had given his cake.  When he heard what Dummling
wanted, he said, since you have given me to eat and to drink, I will
give you the ship, and I do all this because you once were kind to
me.  Then he gave him the ship which could sail on land and water,
and when the king saw that, he could no longer prevent him from
having his daughter.  The wedding was celebrated, and after the
king's death, Dummling inherited his kingdom and lived for a long
time contentedly with his wife.
	Allerleirauh

There was once upon a time a king who had a wife with golden hair,
and she was so beautiful that her equal was not to be found on earth.
It came to pass that she lay ill, and as she felt that she must soon
die, she called the king and said, if you wish to marry again after
my death, take no one who is not quite as beautiful as I am, and who
has not just such golden hair as I have, this you must promise me.
And after the king had promised her this she closed her eyes and
died.

For a long time the king could not be comforted, and had no thought
of taking another wife.  At length his councillors said, this cannot
go on.  The king must marry again, that we may have a queen.  And now
messengers were sent about far and wide, to seek a bride who equalled
the late queen in beauty.  In the whole world, however, none was to
be found, and even if one had been found, still there would have been
no one who had such golden hair.  So the messengers came home as they
went.

Now the king had a daughter, who was just as beautiful as her dead
mother, and had the same golden hair.  When she was grown up the king
looked at her one day, and saw that in every respect she was like his
late wife, and suddenly felt a violent love for her.  Then he spoke
to his councillors, I will marry my daughter, for she is the
counterpart of my late wife, otherwise I can find no bride who
resembles her.  When the councillors heard that, they were shocked,
and said, God has forbidden a father to marry his daughter.  No good
can come from such a crime, and the kingdom will be involved in the
ruin.

The daughter was still more shocked when she became aware of her
father's resolution, but hoped to turn him from his design. Then she
said to him, before I fulfil your wish, I must have three dresses,
one as golden as the sun, one as silvery as the moon, and one as
bright as the stars, besides this, I wish for a mantle of a thousand
different kinds of fur and peltry joined together, and one of every
kind of animal in your kingdom must give a piece of his skin for it.
For she thought, to get that will be quite impossible, and thus I
shall divert my father from his wicked intentions.  The king,
however, did not give it up, and the cleverest maidens in his kingdom
had to weave the three dresses, one as golden as the sun, one as
silvery as the moon, and one as bright as the stars, and his huntsmen
had to catch one of every kind of animal in the whole of his kingdom,
and take from it a piece of its skin, and out of these was made a
mantle of a thousand different kinds of fur.  At length, when all was
ready, the king caused the mantle to be brought, spread it out before
her, and said, the wedding shall be tomorrow.

When, therefore, the king's daughter saw that there was no longer any
hope of turning her father's heart, she resolved to run away.  In the
night whilst every one was asleep, she got up, and took three
different things from her treasures, a golden ring, a golden
spinning-wheel, and a golden reel.  The three dresses of the sun,
moon, and stars she placed into a nutshell, put on her mantle of all
kinds of fur, and blackened her face and hands with soot.  Then she
commended herself to God, and went away, and walked the whole night
until she reached a great forest.  And as she was tired, she got into
a hollow tree, and fell asleep.

The sun rose, and she slept on, and she was still sleeping when it
was full day.  Then it so happened that the king to whom this forest
belonged, was hunting in it.  When his dogs came to the tree, they
sniffed, and ran barking round about it.  The king said to the
huntsmen, just see what kind of wild beast has hidden itself in
there.  The huntsmen obeyed his order, and when they came back they
said, a wondrous beast is lying in the hollow tree, we have never
before seen one like it.  Its skin is fur of a thousand different
kinds, but it is lying asleep.  Said the king, see if you can catch
it alive, and then fasten it to the carriage, and we will take it
with us.  When the huntsmen laid hold of the maiden, she awoke full
of terror, and cried to them, I am a poor child, deserted by father
and mother, have pity on me, and take me with you.  Then said they,
Allerleirauh, you will be useful in the kitchen, come with us, and
you can sweep up the ashes.  So they put her in the carriage, and
took her home to the royal palace.  There they pointed out to her a
closet under the stairs, where no daylight entered, and said, hairy
animal, there you can live and sleep.  Then she was sent into the
kitchen, and there she carried wood and water, swept the hearth,
plucked the fowls, picked the vegetables, raked the ashes, and did
all the dirty work.

Allerleirauh lived there for a long time in great wretchedness. Alas,
fair princess, what is to become of you now.  It happened, however,
that one day a feast was held in the palace, and she said to the
cook, may I go upstairs for a while, and look on.  I will place
myself outside the door.  The cook answered, yes, go, but you must be
back here in half-an-hour to sweep the hearth.

Then she took her oil-lamp, went into her den, put off her dress of
fur, and washed the soot off her face and hands, so that her full
beauty once more came to light.  And she opened the nut, and took out
her dress which shone like the sun, and when she had done that she
went up to the festival, and every one made way for her, for no one
knew her, and thought no otherwise than that she was a king's
daughter.  The king came to meet her, gave his hand to her, and
danced with her, and thought in his heart, my eyes have never yet
seen any one so beautiful.  When the dance was over she curtsied, and
when the king looked round again she had vanished, and none knew
whither.  The guards who stood outside the palace were called and
questioned, but no one had seen her.

She had run into her little den, however, there quickly taken off her
dress, made her face and hands black again, put on the mantle of fur,
and again was Allerleirauh.  And now when she went into the kitchen,
and was about to get to her work and sweep up the ashes, the cook
said, leave that alone till morning, and make me the soup for the
king, I, too, will go upstairs awhile, and take a look, but let no
hairs fall in, or in future you shall have nothing to eat.  So the
cook went away, and Allerleirauh made the soup for the king, and made
bread soup and the best she could, and when it was ready she fetched
her golden ring from her little den, and put it in the bowl in which
the soup was served.  When the dancing was over, the king had his
soup brought and ate it, and he liked it so much that it seemed to
him he had never tasted better.  But when he came to the bottom of
the bowl, he saw a golden ring lying, and could not conceive how it
could have got there.  Then he ordered the cook to appear before him.
The cook was terrified when he heard the order, and said to
Allerleirauh, you have certainly let a hair fall into the soup, and
if you have, you shall be beaten for it.

When he came before the king the latter asked who had made the soup.
The cook replied, I made it.  But the king said, that is not true,
for it was much better than usual, and cooked differently.  He
answered, I must acknowledge that I did not make it, it was made by
the hairy animal.  The king said, go and bid it come up here.

When Allerleirauh came, the king said, who are you.  I am a poor girl
who no longer has any father or mother.  He asked further, of what
use are you in my palace.  She answered, I am good for nothing but to
have boots thrown at my head.  He continued, where did you get the
ring which was in the soup.  She answered, I know nothing about the
ring.  So the king could learn nothing, and had to send her away
again.

After a while, there was another festival, and then, as before,
Allerleirauh begged the cook for leave to go and look on.  He
answered, yes, but come back again in half-an-hour, and make the king
the bread soup which he so much likes.  Then she ran into her den,
washed herself quickly, and took out of the nut the dress which was
as silvery as the moon, and put it on.  Then she went up and was like
a princess, and the king stepped forward to meet her, and rejoiced to
see her once more, and as the dance was just beginning they danced it
together.  But when it was ended, she again disappeared so quickly
that the king could not observe where she went.  She, however, sprang
into her den, and once more made herself a hairy animal, and went
into the kitchen to prepare the bread soup.  When the cook had gone
upstairs, she fetched the little golden spinning-wheel, and put it in
the bowl so that the soup covered it.  Then it was taken to the king,
who ate it, and liked it as much as before, and had the cook brought,
who this time likewise was forced to confess that Allerleirauh had
prepared the soup.  Allerleirauh again came before the king, but she
answered that she was good for nothing else but to have boots thrown
at her head, and that she knew nothing at all about the little golden
spinning-wheel.

When, for the third time, the king held a festival, all happened just
as it had done before.  The cook said, fur-skin, you are a witch, and
always put something in the soup which makes it so good that the king
likes it better than that which I cook, but as she begged so hard, he
let her go up at the appointed time.  And now she put on the dress
which shone like the stars, and thus entered the hall.  Again the
king danced with the beautiful maiden, and thought that she never yet
had been so beautiful.

And whilst she was dancing, he contrived, without her noticing it, to
slip a golden ring on her finger, and he had given orders that the
dance should last a very long time.  When it was ended, he wanted to
hold her fast by her hands, but she tore herself loose, and sprang
away so quickly through the crowd that she vanished from his sight.
She ran as fast as she could into her den beneath the stairs, but as
she had been too long, and had stayed more than half-an-hour she
could not take off her pretty dress, but only threw over it her
mantle of fur, and in her haste she did not make herself quite black,
but one finger remained white.  Then Allerleirauh ran into the
kitchen, and cooked the bread soup for the king, and as the cook was
away, put her golden reel into it.

When the king found the reel at the bottom of it, he caused
Allerleirauh to be summoned, and then he espied the white finger, and
saw the ring which he had put on it during the dance.  Then he
grasped her by the hand, and held her fast, and when she wanted to
release herself and run away, her mantle of fur opened a little, and
the star-dress shone forth.  The king clutched the mantle and tore it
off.  Then her golden hair shone forth, and she stood there in full
splendor, and could no longer hide herself.  And when she had washed
the soot and ashes from her face, she was more beautiful than anyone
who had ever been seen on earth.  But the king said, you are my dear
bride, and we will never more part from each other. Thereupon the
marriage was solemnized, and they lived happily until their death.
There was once a woman and her daughter who lived in a
pretty garden with cabbages.  And a little hare came into it,
and during the winter time ate all the cabbages.  Then says the
mother to the daughter, go into the garden, and chase the hare away.

The girl says to the little hare, sh-sh, hare, you will be eating
all our cabbages.  Says the hare, come, maiden, and seat yourself
on my little hare's tail, and come with me into my
little hare's hut.  The girl will not do it.

Next day the hare
comes again and eats the cabbages, then says the mother to the
daughter, go into the garden, and drive the hare away.  The girl
says to the hare, sh-sh, little hare, you will be eating all the
cabbages.  The little hare says, maiden, seat yourself on my
little hare's tail, and come with me into my little hare's hut.
The maiden refuses.

The third day the hare comes again, and eats
the cabbages.  On this the mother says to the daughter, go into
the garden, and hunt the hare away.  Says the maiden, sh-sh, little
hare, you will be eating all our cabbages.  Says the little
hare, come, maiden, seat yourself on my little hare's tail,
and come with me into my little hare's hut.

The girl seats
herself on the little hare's tail, and then the hare takes her
far away to his little hut, and says, now cook green cabbage and
millet-seed, and I will invite the wedding-guests.  Then all
the wedding-guests assembled.  Who were the wedding-guests?
That I can tell you as another told it to me.  They were all
hares, and the crow was there as parson to marry the bride
and bridegroom, and the fox as clerk, and the altar was under
the rainbow.

The girl, however, was sad, for she was all alone.  The little hare
comes and says, open the doors, open the doors, the wedding-guests
are merry.  The bride says nothing, but weeps.  The little
hare goes away.  The little hare comes back and says, take off
the lid, take off the lid, the wedding-guests are hungry.  The
bride again says nothing, and weeps.  The little hare goes away.
The little hare comes back and says, take off the lid, take off
the lid, the wedding-guests are waiting.  Then the bride says
nothing, and the hare goes away, but she dresses a straw-doll
in her clothes, and gives her a spoon to stir with, and sets
her by the pan with the millet-seed, and goes back to her
mother.  The little hare comes once more and says, take off
the lid, take off the lid, and gets up, and strikes the doll
on the head so that her cap falls off.
Then the little hare sees that it is not his bride, and goes
away and is sorrowful.
There was once a king's son who had a bride whom he loved very much.
And when he was sitting beside her and very happy, news came that his
father lay sick unto death, and desired to see him once again before
his end.  Then he said to his beloved, I must now go and leave you, I
give you a ring as a remembrance of me.  When I am king, I will
return and fetch you.

So he rode away, and when he reached his father, the latter was
dangerously ill, and near his death.  He said to him, dear son, I
wished to see you once again before my end, promise me to marry as I
wish, and he named a certain king's daughter who was to be his wife.
The son was in such trouble that he did not think what he was doing,
and said, yes, dear father, your will shall be done, and thereupon
the king shut his eyes, and died.

When therefore the son had been proclaimed king, and the time of
mourning was over, he was forced to keep the promise which he had
given his father, and caused the king's daughter to be asked in
marriage, and she was promised to him.  His first betrothed heard of
this, and fretted so much about his faithlessness that she nearly
died.  Then her father said to her, dearest child, why are you so
sad.  You shall have whatsoever you will.  She thought for a moment
and said, dear father, I wish for eleven girls exactly like myself in
face, figure, and size.  The father said, if it be possible, your
desire shall be fulfilled, and he caused a search to be made in his
whole kingdom, until eleven young maidens were found who exactly
resembled his daughter in face, figure, and size.

When they came to the king's daughter, she had twelve suits of
huntsmen's clothes made, all alike, and the eleven maidens had to put
on the huntsmen's clothes, and she herself put on the twelfth suit.

Thereupon she took leave of her father, and rode away with them, and
rode to the court of her former betrothed, whom she loved so dearly.
Then she asked if he required any huntsmen, and if he would take all
of them into his service.  The king looked at her and did not know
her, but as they were such handsome fellows, he said, yes, and that
he would willingly take them, and now they were the king's twelve
huntsmen.

The king, however, had a lion which was a wondrous animal, for he
knew all concealed and secret things.  It came to pass that one
evening he said to the king, you think you have twelve huntsmen.
Yes, said the king, they are twelve huntsmen. The lion continued, you
are mistaken, they are twelve girls.

The king said, that cannot be true.  How will you prove that to me.
Oh, just let some peas be strewn in the ante-chamber, answered swered
the lion, and then you will soon see.  Men have a firm step, and when
they walk over the peas none of them stir, but girls trip and skip,
and drag their feet, and the peas roll about. The king was well
pleased with the counsel, and caused the peas to be strewn.

There was, however, a servant of the king's who favored the huntsmen,
and when he heard that they were going to be put to this test he went
to them and repeated everything, and said, the lion wants to make the
king believe that you are girls.  Then the king's daughter thanked
him, and said to her maidens, show some strength, and step firmly on
the peas.  So next morning when the king had the twelve huntsmen
called before him, and they came into the ante-chamber where the peas
were lying, they stepped so firmly on them, and had such a strong,
sure walk, that not one of the peas either rolled or stirred.

Then they went away again, and the king said to the lion, you have
lied to me, they walk just like men.  The lion said, they have been
informed that they were going to be put to the test, and have assumed
some strength.  Just let twelve spinning-wheels be brought into the
ante-chamber, and they will go to them and be pleased with them, and
that is what no man would do.  The king liked the advice, and had the
spinning-wheels placed in the ante-chamber.

But the servant, who was well disposed to the huntsmen, went to them,
and disclosed the project.  So when they were alone the king's
daughter said to her eleven girls, show some constraint, and do not
look round at the spinning-wheels.  And next morning when the king
had his twelve huntsmen summoned, they went through the ante-chamber,
and never once looked at the spinning wheels.

Then the king again said to the lion, you have deceived me, they are
men, for they have not looked at the spinning-wheels. The lion
replied, they have learnt that they were going to be put to the test,
and have restrained themselves.  The king, however, would no longer
believe the lion.

The twelve huntsmen always followed the king to the chase, and his
liking for them continually increased.  Now it came to pass that once
when they were hunting, news came that the king's bride was
approaching.  When the true bride heard that, it hurt her so much
that her heart was almost broken, and she fell fainting to the
ground.  The king thought something had happened to his dear
huntsman, ran up to him, wanted to help him, and drew his glove off.
Then he saw the ring which he had given to his first bride, and when
he looked in her face he recognized her.

Then his heart was so touched that he kissed her, and when she opened
her eyes he said, you are mine, and I am yours, and no one in the
world can alter that.  He sent a messenger to the other bride, and
entreated her to return to her own kingdom, for he had a wife
already, and someone who had found an old key did not require a new
one.  Thereupon the wedding was celebrated, and the lion was again
taken into favor, because, after all, he had told the truth.
Hans wished to put his son to learn a trade, so he went into the
church and prayed to our Lord God to know which would be the most
suitable for him.  Then the clerk got behind the altar, and said,
thieving, thieving.  On this Hans goes back to his son, and tells him
he is to learn thieving, and that the Lord God had said so.  So he
goes with his son to seek a man who is acquainted with thieving.
They walk a long time and come into a great forest, where stands a
little house with an old woman in it.  Hans says, do you know of a
man who is acquainted with thieving.  You can learn that here quite
well, says the woman, my son is a master of it.  So he speaks with
the son, and asks if he knows thieving really well.  The master-thief
says, I will teach him well.  Come back when a year is over, and then
if you recognize your son, I will take no payment at all for teaching
him, but if you don't know him, you must give me two hundred talers.

The father goes home again, and the son learns witchcraft and
thieving, thoroughly.  When the year is out, the father is full of
anxiety to know how he shall recognize his son.  As he is thus going
about in his trouble, he meets a little dwarf, who says, man, what
ails you, that you are always in such trouble.

Oh, says Hans, a year ago I placed my son with a master-thief who
told me I was to come back when the year was out, and that if I then
did not know my son when I saw him, I was to pay two hundred talers,
but if I did know him I was to pay nothing, and now I am afraid of
not knowing him and can't tell where I am to get the money.  Then the
dwarf tells him to take a crust of bread with him, and to stand
beneath the chimney.  There on the cross-beam is a basket, out of
which a little bird is peeping, and that is your son.

Hans goes thither, and throws a crust of black bread in front of the
basket with the bird in it, and the little bird comes out, and looks
up.  Hello, my son, are you here, says the father, and the son is
delighted to see his father, but the master-thief says, the devil
must have prompted you, or how could you have known your son.
Father, let us go, said the youth.

Then the father and son set out homeward.  On the way a carriage
comes driving by.  Hereupon the son says to his father, I will change
myself into a large greyhound, and then you can earn a great deal of
money by me.  Then the gentleman calls from the carriage, my man,
will you sell your dog.  Yes, says the father. How much do you want
for it.  Thirty talers.  Well, man, that is a great deal, but as it
is such a very fine dog I will have it. The gentleman takes it into
his carriage, but when they have driven a little farther the dog
springs out of the carriage through the window, and goes back to his
father, and is no longer a greyhound.

They go home together.  Next day there is a fair in the neighboring
town, so the youth says to his father, I will now change myself into
a beautiful horse, and you can sell me, but when you have sold me,
you must take off my bridle, or I cannot become a man again.  Then
the father goes with the horse to the fair, and the master-thief
comes and buys the horse for a hundred talers, but the father
forgets, and does not take off the bridle.  So the man goes home with
the horse, and puts it in the stable.

When the maid crosses the threshold, the horse says, take off my
bridle, take off my bridle. Then the maid stands still, and says,
what, can you speak.  So she goes and takes the bridle off, and the
horse becomes a sparrow, and flies out at the door, and the
master-thief becomes a sparrow also, and flies after him.

Then they come together and cast lots again, and the master loses.
So the master changes himself into a cock, and the youth becomes a
fox, and bites the master's head off, and he died and has remained
dead to this day.
A father once called his three sons before him, and he gave to the
first a cock, to the second a scythe, and to the third a cat.  I am
already aged, said he, my death is nigh, and I have wished to provide
for you before my end, money I have not, and what I now give you
seems of little worth, but all depends on your making a sensible use
of it.  Only seek out a country where such things are still unknown,
and your fortune is made.

After the father's death the eldest went away with his cock, but
wherever he came the cock was already known, in the towns he saw him
from a long distance, sitting upon the steeples and turning round
with the wind, and in the villages he heard more than one crowing, no
one would show any wonder at the creature, so that it did not look as
if he would make his fortune by it.

At last, however, it happened that he came to an island where the
people knew nothing about cocks, and did not even understand how to
divide their time.  They certainly knew when it was morning or
evening, but at night, if they did not sleep through it, not one of
them knew how to find out the time.

Look. Said he, what a proud creature.  It has a ruby-red crown upon
its head, and wears spurs like a knight, it calls you three times
during the night, at fixed hours, and when it calls for the last
time, the sun soon rises.  But if it crows by broad daylight, then
take notice, for there will certainly be a change of weather.

The people were well pleased, for a whole night they did not sleep,
and listened with great delight as the cock at two, four, and six
o'clock, loudly and clearly proclaimed the time.  They asked if the
creature were for sale, and how much he wanted for it.  About as much
gold as an ass can carry, answered he.  A ridiculously small price
for such a precious creature. They cried unanimously, and willingly
gave him what he had asked.

When he came home with his wealth his brothers were astonished, and
the second said, well, I will go forth and see whether I cannot get
rid of my scythe as profitably.  But it did not look as if he would,
for laborers met him everywhere, and they had scythes upon their
shoulders as well as he.

At last, however, he chanced upon an island where the people knew
nothing of scythes.  When the corn was ripe there, they took cannon
out to the fields and shot it down.  Now this was rather an uncertain
affair, many shot right over it, others hit the ears instead of the
stems, and shot them away, whereby much was lost, and besides all
this, it made a terrible noise.  So the man set to work and mowed it
down so quietly and quickly that the people opened their mouths with
astonishment.  They agreed to give him what he wanted for the scythe,
and he received a horse laden with as much gold as it could carry.

And now the third brother wanted to take his cat to the right man. He
fared just like the others, so long as he stayed on the mainland
there was nothing to be done.  Every place had cats, and there were
so many of them that new-born kittens were generally drowned in the
ponds.

At last he sailed over to an island, and it luckily happened that no
cats had ever yet been seen there, and that the mice had got the
upper hand so much that they danced upon the tables and benches
whether the master were at home or not.  The people complained
bitterly of the plague, the king himself in his palace did not know
how to protect himself against them, mice squeaked in every corner,
and gnawed whatever they could lay hold of with their teeth.

But now the cat began her chase, and soon cleared a couple of rooms,
and the people begged the king to buy the wonderful beast for the
country.  The king willingly gave what was asked, which was a mule
laden with gold, and the third brother came home with the greatest
treasure of all.

The cat made herself merry with the mice in the royal palace, and
killed so many that they could not be counted.  At last she grew warm
with the work and thirsty, so she stood still, lifted up her head and
cried, mew. Mew.

When they heard this strange cry, the king and all his people were
frightened, and in their terror ran all at once out of the palace.
Then the king took counsel what was best to be done, at last it was
determined to send a herald to the cat, and demand that she should
leave the palace, or if not, she was to expect that force would be
used against her.  The councillors said, rather will we let ourselves
be plagued with the mice, for to that misfortune we are accustomed,
than give up our lives to such a monster as this.  A noble youth,
therefore, was sent to ask the cat whether she would peaceably quit
the castle.  But the cat, whose thirst had become still greater,
merely answered, mew. Mew.  The youth understood her to say, "Most
certainly not. Most certainly not." And took this answer to the king.

Then, said the councillors, she shall yield to force. Cannon were
brought out, and the palace was soon in flames.  When the fire
reached the room where the cat was sitting, she sprang safely out of
the window, but the besiegers did not leave off until the whole
palace was shot down to the ground.
There was once a man who understood all kinds of arts.  He served in
war, and behaved well and bravely, but when the war was over he
received his dismissal, and three farthings for his expenses on the
way.  Wait, said he, I shall not be content with this. If I can only
meet with the right people, the king will yet have to give me all the
treasure of the country.

Then full of anger he went into the forest, and saw a man standing
therein who had plucked up six trees as if they were blades of corn.
He said to him, will you be my servant and go with me.  Yes, he
answered, but, first, I will take this little bundle of sticks home
to my mother, and he took one of the trees, and wrapped it round the
five others, lifted the bundle on his back, and carried it away. Then
he returned and went with his master, who said, we two ought to be
able to get through the world very well, and when they had walked on
for a short while they found a huntsman who was kneeling, had
shouldered his gun, and was about to fire.  The master said to him,
huntsman, what are you going to shoot.  He answered, two miles from
here a fly is sitting on the branch of an oak-tree, and I want to
shoot its left eye out.

Oh, come with me, said the man, if we three are together, we
certainly ought to be able to get on in the world.  The huntsman was
ready, and went with him, and they came to seven windmills whose
sails were turning round with great speed, and yet no wind was
blowing either on the right or the left, and no leaf was stirring.
Then said the man, I know not what is driving the windmills, not a
breath of air is stirring, and he went onwards with his servants, and
when they had walked two miles they saw a man sitting on a tree who
was shutting one nostril, and blowing out of the other.  Good
gracious.  What are you doing up there.

He answered, two miles from here are seven windmills.  Look, I am
blowing them till they turn round.  Oh, come with me, said the man.
If we four are together, we shall carry the whole world before us.
Then the blower came down and went with him, and after a while they
saw a man who was standing on one leg and had taken off the other,
and laid it beside him.  Then the master said, you have arranged
things very comfortably to have a rest.

I am a runner, he replied, and to stop myself running far too fast, I
have taken off one of my legs, for if I run with both, I go quicker
than any bird can fly.  Oh, go with me.  If we five are together, we
shall carry the whole world before us.

So he went with them, and it was not long before they met a man who
wore a cap, but wore it entirely over one ear.  Then the master said
to him, gracefully, gracefully, don't stick your cap on one ear, you
look just like a tom-fool.  I must not wear it otherwise, said he,
for if I set my hat straight, a terrible frost comes on, and all the
birds in the air are frozen, and drop dead on the ground.  Oh, come
with me, said the master. If we six are together, we can carry the
whole world before us.

Now the six came to a town where the king had proclaimed that
whosoever ran a race with his daughter and won the victory, should be
her husband, but whosoever lost it, must lose his head.  Then the man
presented himself and said, I will, however, let my servant run for
me.  The king replied, then his life also must be staked, so that his
head and yours are both set on the victory.  When that was settled
and made secure, the man buckled the other leg on the runner, and
said to him, now be nimble, and help us to win.  It was fixed that
the one who was first to bring some water from a far distant well was
to be the victor.  The runner received a pitcher, and the king's
daughter one too, and they began to run at the same time, but in an
instant, when the king's daughter had got a very little way, the
people who were looking on could see no more of the runner, and it
was just as if the wind had whistled by.  In a short time he reached
the well, filled his pitcher with water, and turned back.  Half-way
home, however, he was overcome with fatigue, and set his pitcher
down, lay down himself, and fell asleep.  But he had made a pillow of
a horse's skull which was lying on the ground, in order that he might
lie uncomfortably, and soon wake up again.  In the meantime the
king's daughter, who could also run very well - quite as well as any
ordinary mortal can - had reached the well, and was hurrying back
with her pitcher full of water, and when she saw the runner lying
there asleep, she was glad and said, my enemy is delivered over into
my hands, emptied his pitcher, and ran on.  And now all would have
been lost if by good luck the huntsman had not been standing at the
top of the castle, and had not seen everything with his sharp eyes.

Then said he, the king's daughter shall still not prevail against us.
And he loaded his gun, and shot so cleverly, that he shot the horse's
skull away from under the runner's head without hurting him.  Then
the runner awoke, leapt up, and saw that his pitcher was empty, and
that the king's daughter was already far in advance.  He did not lose
heart, however, but ran back to the well with his pitcher, again drew
some water, and was at home again even ten minutes before the king's
daughter.  Behold, said he, only now have I begun to use my legs.
What I did before did not deserve to be called running.

But it pained the king, and still more his daughter, that she should
be carried off by a common discharged soldier like that. So they took
counsel with each other how to get rid of him and his companions.
Then said the king to her, I have thought of a way.  Don't be afraid,
they shall not come back again.  And he said to them, you shall now
make merry together, and eat and drink, and he conducted them to a
room which had a floor of iron, and the doors also were of iron, and
the windows were guarded with iron bars.  There was a table in the
room covered with delicious food, and the king said to them, go in,
and enjoy yourselves.  And when they were inside, he ordered the
doors to be shut and bolted.  Then he sent for the cook, and
commanded him to make a fire under the room until the iron became
red-hot.

This the cook did, and the six who were sitting at table began to
feel quite warm, and they thought the heat was caused by the food.
But as it became still greater, and they wanted to get out, and found
that the doors and windows were bolted, they became aware that the
king must have an evil intention, and wanted to suffocate them.  He
shall not succeed, however, said the one with the cap.  I will cause
a frost to come, before which the fire shall be ashamed, and creep
away.

Then he put his cap on straight, and immediately there came such a
frost that all heat disappeared, and the food on the dishes began to
freeze.  When an hour or two had passed by, and the king believed
that they had perished in the heat, he had the doors opened to behold
them himself.  But when the doors were opened, all six were standing
there, alive and well, and said that they should very much like to
get out to warm themselves, for the very food was fast frozen to the
dishes with the cold.  Then, full of anger, the king went down to the
cook, scolded him, and asked why he had not done what he had been
ordered to do.  But the cook replied, there is heat enough there,
just look yourself. Then the king saw that a fierce fire was burning
under the iron room, and perceived that there was no getting the
better of the six in this way.

Again the king considered how to get rid of his unpleasant guests,
and caused their chief to be brought and said, if you will take gold
and renounce my daughter, you shall have as much as you will.

Oh, yes, lord king, he answered, give me as much as my servant can
carry, and I will not ask for your daughter.

On this the king was satisfied, and the other continued, in fourteen
days, I will come and fetch it.  Thereupon he summoned together all
the tailors in the whole kingdom, and they were to sit for fourteen
days and sew a sack.  And when it was ready, the strong one who could
tear up trees had to take it on his back, and go with it to the king.
Then said the king, who can that strong fellow be who is carrying a
bundle of linen on his back that is as big as a house.  And he was
alarmed and said, what a lot of gold he can carry away.  Then he
commanded a ton of gold to be brought, which took sixteen of his
strongest men to carry, but the strong one snatched it up in one
hand, put it in his sack, and said, why don't you bring more at the
same time.  That hardly covers the bottom.  Then, little by little,
the king caused all his treasure to be brought thither, and the
strong one pushed it into the sack, and still the sack was not half
full with it.  Bring more, cried he, these few crumbs don't fill it.

Then seven thousand carts with gold had to be gathered together in
the whole kingdom, and the strong one thrust them and the oxen
harnessed to them into his sack.  I will examine it no longer, said
he, but will just take what comes, so long as the sack is but full.
When all that was inside, there was still room for a great deal more.
Then he said, I will just make an end of the thing.  People do
sometimes tie up a sack even when it is not full.  So he took it on
his back, and went away with his comrades.  When the king now saw how
one single man was carrying away the entire wealth of the country, he
became enraged, and bade his horsemen mount and pursue the six, and
ordered them to take the sack away from the strong one.  Two
regiments speedily overtook the six, and called out, you are
prisoners, put down the sack with the gold, or you will be cut to
pieces.  What say you, cried the blower, that we are prisoners.

Rather than that should happen, all of you shall dance about in the
air.  And he closed one nostril, and with the other blew on the two
regiments.  Then they were driven away from each other, and carried
into the blue sky over all the mountains, one here, the other there.
One sergeant cried for mercy.  He had nine wounds, and was a brave
fellow who did not deserve ill treatment.

The blower stopped a little so that he came down without injury, and
then the blower said to him.  Now go home to your king, and tell him
he had better send some more horsemen, and I will blow them all into
the air.  When the king was informed of this he said, let the rascals
go.  There is magic in them.  Then the six conveyed the riches home,
divided it amongst them, and lived in content until their death.
The she-wolf brought into the world a young one, and invited the fox
to be godfather.  After all, he is a near relative of ours, said she,
he has a good understanding, and much talent, he can instruct my
little son, and help him forward in the world.  The fox, too,
appeared quite honest, and said, worthy mrs. Gossip, I thank you for
the honor which you are doing me, I will, however, conduct myself in
such a way that you shall be repaid for it.  He enjoyed himself at
the feast, and made merry, afterwards he said, dear mrs. Gossip, it
is our duty to take care of the child, it must have good food that it
may be strong.  I know a sheep-fold from which we might fetch a nice
morsel.  The wolf was pleased with the idea, and she went out with
the fox to the farmyard.  He pointed out the fold from afar, and
said, you will be able to creep in there without being seen, and in
the meantime I will look about on the other side to see if I can pick
up a chicken.  He, however, did not go there, but sat down at the
entrance to the forest, stretched his legs and rested.

The she-wolf crept into the stable.  A dog was lying there, and it
made such a noise that the peasants came running out, caught gossip
wolf, and poured a strong burning mixture, which had been prepared
for washing, over her skin.  At last she escaped, and dragged herself
outside.  There lay the fox, who pretended to be full of complaints,
and said, ah, dear mrs. Gossip, how ill I have fared, the peasants
have fallen on me, and have broken every limb I have, if you do not
want me to lie where I am and perish, you must carry me away.  The
she-wolf herself was only able to walk slowly, but she was in such
concern about the fox that she took him on her back, and slowly
carried him who was perfectly safe and sound to her house.  Then the
fox cried to her, farewell, dear mrs. Gossip, may the roasting you
have had do you good, laughed heartily at her, and bounded off.
There was once upon a time a queen to whom God had given no children.
Every morning she went into the garden and prayed to God in heaven to
bestow on her a son or a daughter.  Then an angel from heaven came to
her and said, be at rest, you shall have a son with the power of
wishing, so that whatsoever in the world he wishes for, that shall he
have.  Then she went to the king, and told him the joyful tidings,
and when the time was come she gave birth to a son, and the king was
filled with gladness.

Every morning she went with the child to the garden where the wild
beasts were kept, and washed herself there in a clear stream.  It
happened once when the child was a little older, that it was lying in
her arms and she fell asleep.  Then came the old cook, who knew that
the child had the power of wishing, and stole it away, and he took a
hen, and cut it in pieces, and dropped some of its blood on the
queen's apron and on her dress.  Then he carried the child away to a
secret place, where a nurse was obliged to suckle it, and he ran to
the king and accused the queen of having allowed her child to be
taken from her by the wild beasts.  When the king saw the blood on
her apron, he believed this, fell into such a passion that he ordered
a high tower to be built, in which neither sun nor moon could be
seen, and had his wife put into it, and walled up.  Here she was to
stay for seven years without meat or drink, and die of hunger.  But
God sent two angels from heaven in the shape of white doves, which
flew to her twice a day, and carried her food until the seven years
were over.

The cook, however, thought to himself, if the child has the power of
wishing, and I am here, he might very easily get me into trouble.  So
he left the palace and went to the boy, who was already big enough to
speak, and said to him, wish for a beautiful palace for yourself with
a garden, and all else that pertains to it.  Scarcely were the words
out of the boy's mouth, when everything was there that he had wished
for.  After a while the cook said to him, it is not well for you to
be so alone, wish for a pretty girl as a companion.  Then the king's
son wished for one, and she immediately stood before him, and was
more beautiful than any painter could have painted her.

The two played together, and loved each other with all their hearts,
and the old cook went out hunting like a nobleman.  The thought
occurred to him, however, that the king's son might some day wish to
be with his father, and thus bring him into great peril.  So he went
out and took the maiden aside, and said, to-night when the boy is
asleep, go to his bed and plunge this knife into his heart, and bring
me his heart and tongue, and if you do not do it, you shall lose your
life.

Thereupon he went away, and when he returned next day she had not
done it, and said, why should I shed the blood of an innocent boy who
has never harmed anyone.  The cook once more said, if you do not do
it, it shall cost you your own life.

When he had gone away, she had a little hind brought to her, and
ordered her to be killed, and took her heart and tongue, and laid
them on a plate, and when she saw the old man coming, she said to the
boy, lie down in your bed, and draw the clothes over you.  Then the
wicked wretch came in and said, where are the boy's heart and tongue.
The girl reached the plate to him, but the king's son threw off the
quilt, and said, you old sinner, why did you want to kill me.  Now
will I pronounce thy sentence.  You shall become a black poodle and
have a gold collar round your neck, and shall eat burning coals, till
the flames burst forth from your throat.  And when he had spoken
these words, the old man was changed into a poodle dog, and had a
gold collar round his neck, and the cooks were ordered to bring up
some live coals, and these he ate, until the flames broke forth from
his throat.

The king's son remained there a short while longer, and he thought of
his mother, and wondered if she were still alive.  At length he said
to the maiden, I will go home to my own country, if you will go with
me, I will provide for you.

Ah, she replied, the way is so long, and what shall I do in a strange
land where I am unknown.  As she did not seem quite willing, and as
they could not be parted from each other, he wished that she might be
changed into a beautiful pink, and took her with him.  Then he went
away to his own country, and the poodle had to run after him.

He went to the tower in which his mother was confined, and as it was
so high, he wished for a ladder which would reach up to the very top.
Then he mounted up and looked inside, and cried, beloved mother, lady
queen, are you still alive, or are you dead.  She answered, I have
just eaten, and am still satisfied, for she thought the angels were
there.  Said he, I am your dear son, whom the wild beasts were said
to have torn from your arms, but I am alive still, and will soon set
you free.

Then he descended again, and went to his father, and caused himself
to be ammounced as a strange huntsman, and asked if he could offer
him service.  The king said yes, if he was skilful and could get game
for him, he should come to him, but that deer had never taken up
their quarters in any part of the district or country.  Then the
huntsman promised to procure as much game for him as he could
possibly use at the royal table.  So he summoned all the huntsmen
together, and bade them go out into the forest with him.  And he went
with them and made them form a great circle, open at one end where he
stationed himself, and began to wish.

Two hundred deer and more came running inside the circle at once, and
the huntsmen shot them.  Then they were all placed on sixty country
carts, and driven home to the king, and for once he was able to deck
his table with game, after having had none at all for years.

Now the king felt great joy at this, and commanded that his entire
household should eat with him next day, and made a great feast. When
they were all assembled together, he said to the huntsmen, as you are
so clever, you shall sit by me.  He replied, lord king, your majesty
must excuse me, I am a poor huntsman.  But the king insisted on it,
and said, you shall sit by me, until he did it. Whilst he was sitting
there, he thought of his dearest mother, and wished that one of the
king's principal servants would begin to speak of her, and would ask
how it was faring with the queen in the tower, and if she were alive
still, or had perished.

Hardly had he formed the wish than the marshal began, and said, your
majesty, we live joyously here, but how is the queen living in the
tower.  Is she still alive, or has she died?  But the king replied,
she let my dear son be torn to pieces by wild beasts, I will not have
her named.  Then the huntsman arose and said, gracious lord father,
she is alive still, and I am her son, and I was not carried away by
wild beasts, but by that wretch the old cook, who tore me from her
arms when she was asleep, and sprinkled her apron with the blood of a
chicken.

Thereupon he took the dog with the golden collar, and said, that is
the wretch, and caused live coals to be brought, and these the dog
was compelled to devour before the sight of all, until flames burst
forth from its throat.  On this the huntsman asked the king if he
would like to see the dog in his true shape, and wished him back into
the form of the cook, in the which he stood immediately, with his
white apron, and his knife by his side.  When the king saw him he
fell into a passion, and ordered him to be cast into the deepest
dungeon.

Then the huntsman spoke further and said, father, will you see the
maiden who brought me up so tenderly and who was afterwards to murder
me, but did not do it, though her own life depended on it.  The king
replied, yes, I would like to see her.  The son said, most gracious
father, I will show her to you in the form of a beautiful flower, and
he thrust his hand into his pocket and brought forth the pink, and
placed it on the royal table, and it was so beautiful that the king
had never seen one to equal it.  Then the son said, now will I show
her to you in her own form, and wished that she might become a
maiden, and she stood there looking so beautiful that no painter
could have made her look more so.

And the king sent two waiting-maids and two attendants into the
tower, to fetch the queen and bring her to the royal table. But when
whe was led in she ate nothing, and said, the gracious and merciful
God who has supported me in the tower, will soon set me free.  She
lived three days more, and then died happily, and when she was
buried, the two white doves which had brought her food to the tower,
and were angels of heaven, followed her body and seated themselves on
her grave.  The aged king ordered the cook to be torn in four pieces,
but grief consumed the king's own heart, and he soon died.  His son
married the beautiful maiden whom he had brought with him as a flower
in his pocket, and whether they are still alive or not, is known to
God.
There was once a very old man, whose eyes had become dim, his ears
dull of hearing, his knees trembled, and when he sat at table he
could hardly hold the spoon, and spilt the broth upon the table-cloth
or let it run out of his mouth.  His son and his son's wife were
disgusted at this, so the old grandfather at last had to sit in the
corner behind the stove, and they gave him his food in an earthenware
bowl, and not even enough of it.  And he used to look towards the
table with his eyes full of tears.

Once, too, his trembling hands could not hold the bowl, and it fell
to the ground and broke.  The young wife scolded him, but he said
nothing and only sighed.  Then they bought him a wooden bowl for a
few half-pence, out of which he had to eat.

They were once sitting thus when the little grandson of four years
old began to gather together some bits of wood upon the ground.  What
are you doing there, asked the father.  I am making a little trough,
answered the child, for father and mother to eat out of when I am
big.

The man and his wife looked at each other for a while, and presently
began to cry.  Then they took the old grandfather to the table, and
henceforth always let him eat with them, and likewise said nothing if
he did spill a little of anything.
A little brother and sister were once playing by a well, and while
they were thus playing, they both fell in.  A water-nixie lived down
below, who said, now I have got you, now you shall work hard for me,
and carried them off with her.  She gave the girl dirty tangled flax
to spin, and she had to fetch water in a bucket with a hole in it,
and the boy had to hew down a tree with a blunt axe, and they got
nothing to eat but dumplings as hard as stones.

Then at last the children became so impatient, that they waited until
one sunday, when the nixie was at church, and ran away.  But when
church was over, the nixie saw that the birds were flown, and
followed them with great strides.  The children saw her from afar,
and the girl threw a brush behind her which formed an immense hill of
bristles, with thousands and thousands of spikes, over which the
nixie was forced to scramble with great difficulty, at last, however,
she got over.

When the children saw this, the boy threw behind him a comb which
made a great ridge with a thousand times a thousand teeth, but the
nixie managed to keep herself steady on them, and at last crossed
over.  Then the girl threw behind her a looking-glass which formed a
hill of mirrors, and was so slippery that it was impossible for the
nixie to cross it.  Then she thought, I will go home quickly and
fetch my axe, and cut the hill of glass in half.  Long before she
returned, however, and had hewn through the glass, the children had
escaped to a great distance, and the water-nixie was obliged to
trundle back to her well again.

There was one upon a time a great war, and when it came to an end,
many soldiers were discharged.  Then brother lustig also received his
dismissal, and with it nothing but a small loaf of ammunition-bread,
and four kreuzers in money, with which he departed.

St. Peter, however, had placed himself in his way in the form of a
poor beggar, and when brother lustig came up, he begged alms of him.
Brother lustig replied, dear beggar-man, what am I to give you.  I
have been a soldier, and have received my dismissal, and have nothing
but this little loaf of ammunition-bread, and four kreuzers of money.
When that is gone, I shall have to beg as well as you.  Still I will
give you something.

Thereupon he divided the loaf into four parts, and gave the apostle
one of them, and a kreuzer likewise.  St. Peter thanked him, went
onwards, and threw himself again in the soldier's way as a beggar,
but in another shape, and when he came up begged a gift of him as
before.

Brother lustig spoke as he had done before, and again gave him a
quarter of the loaf and one kreuzer.  St. Peter thanked him, and went
onwards, but for the third time placed himself in another shape as a
beggar in the road, and spoke to brother lustig. Brother lustig gave
him also the third quarter of bread and the third kreuzer.  St. Peter
thanked him, and brother lustig went onwards, and had but a quarter
of the loaf, and one kreuzer.

With that he went into an inn, ate the bread, and ordered one
kreuzer's worth of beer.  When he had had it, he journeyed onwards,
and then St. Peter, who had assumed the appearance of a discharged
soldier, met and spoke to him thus.  Good day, comrade, can you not
give me a bit of bread, and a kreuzer to get a drink.  Where am I to
procure it, answered brother lustig. I have been discharged, and I
got nothing but a loaf of ammunition-bread and four kreuzers in
money.  I met three beggars on the road, and I gave each of them a
quarter of my bread, and one kreuzer.  The last quarter I ate in the
inn, and had a drink with the last kreuzer.  Now my pockets are
empty, and if you also have nothing we can go a-begging together.

No, answered St. Peter, we need not quite do that.  I know a little
about medicine, and I will soon earn as much as I require by that.
Indeed, said brother lustig, I know nothing of that, so I must go and
beg alone.  Just come with me, said St. Peter, and if I earn
anything, you shall have half of it.

All right, said brother lustig, and they went away together. Then
they came to a peasant's house inside which they heard loud
lamentations and cries.  So they went in, and there the husband was
lying sick unto death, and very near his end, and his wife was crying
and weeping quite loudly.  Stop that howling and crying, said St.
Peter, I will make the man well again, and he took a salve out of his
pocket, and healed the sick man in a moment, so that he could get up,
and was in perfect health.

In great delight the man and his wife said, how can we reward you.
What shall we give you.  But St. Peter would take nothing, and the
more the peasant folks offered him, the more he refused.  Brother
lustig, however, nudged St. Peter, and said, take something.  Sure
enough we are in need of it.

At length the woman brought a lamb and said to St. Peter that he
really must take that, but he would not. Then brother lustig gave him
a poke in the side, and said, do take it, you stupid fool.  We are in
great want of it.  Then St. Peter said at last, well, I will take the
lamb, but I won't carry it.  If you insist on having it, you must
carry it.  That is nothing, said brother lustig.  I will easily carry
it, and took it on his shoulder.

Then they departed and came to a wood, but brother lustig had begun
to feel the lamb heavy, and he was hungry, so he said to St. Peter,
look, that's a good place, we might cook the lamb there, and eat it.
As you like, answered St. Peter, but I can't have anything to do with
the cooking.  If you will cook, there is a kettle for you, and in the
meantime I will walk about a little until it is ready.  But you must
not begin to eat until I have come back.  I will come at the right
time.  Well, go, then, said brother lustig.  I understand cookery, I
will manage it.

Then St. Peter went away, and brother lustig killed the lamb, lighted
a fire, threw the meat into the kettle, and boiled it.  When the
lamb, however, was quite ready, and the apostle peter had not come
back, brother lustig took it out of the kettle, cut it up, and found
the heart. That is said to be the best part, said he, and tasted it,
but at last he ate it all up.  At length St. Peter returned and said,
you may eat the whole of the lamb yourself, I will only have the
heart, give me that.

Then brother lustig took a knife and fork, and pretended to look
anxiously about amongst the lamb's flesh, but not to be able to find
the heart, and at last he said abruptly, there is none here.  But
where can it be, said the apostle.  I don't know, replied brother
lustig, but look, what fools we both are, to seek for the lamb's
heart, and neither of us to remember that a lamb has no heart.  Oh,
said St. Peter, that is something quite new.  Every animal has a
heart, why is a lamb to have none.  No, be assured, my brother, said
brother lustig, that a lamb has no heart.  Just consider it
seriously, and then you will see that it really has none.  Well, it
is all right, said St. Peter.  If there is no heart, then I want none
of the lamb.  You may eat it alone.

What I can't eat now, I will carry away in my knapsack, said brother
lustig, and he ate half the lamb, and put the rest in his knapsack.

They went farther, and then St. Peter caused a great stream of water
to flow right across their path, and they were obliged to pass
through it.  Said St. Peter, do you go first.  No, answered brother
lustig, you must go first, and he thought, if the water is too deep I
will stay behind.  Then St. Peter strode through it, and the water
just reached to his knee. So brother lustig began to go through also,
but the water grew deeper and reached to his throat.  Then he cried,
brother, help me.

St. Peter said, then will you confess that you have eaten the lamb's
heart.  No, said he, I have not eaten it.  Then the water grew deeper
still and rose to his mouth.  Help me, brother, cried the soldier.
St. Peter said, then will you confess that you have eaten the lamb's
heart.  No, he replied, I have not eaten it.  St. Peter, however,
would not let him be drowned, but made the water sink and helped him
through it.

Then they journeyed onwards, and came to a kingdom where they heard
that the king's daughter lay sick unto death.  Hi, there, brother,
said the soldier to St. Peter, this is a chance for us.  If we can
heal her we shall be provided for, for life.

But St. Peter was not half quick enough for him.  Come, lift your
legs, my dear brother, said he, that we may get there in time.  But
St. Peter walked slower and slower, though brother lustig did all he
could to drive and push him on, and at last they heard that the
princess was dead.  Now we are done for, said brother lustig.  That
comes of your sleepy way of walking.

Just be quiet, answered St. Peter, I can do more than cure sick
people.  I can bring dead ones to life again.  Well, if you can do
that, said brother lustig, it's all right, but you should earn at
least half the kingdom for us by that.  Then they went to the royal
palace, where everyone was in great grief, but St. Peter told the
king that he would restore his daughter to life.  He was taken to
her, and said, bring me a kettle and some water, and when that was
brought, he bade everyone go out, and allowed no one to remain with
him but brother lustig.  Then he cut off all the dead girl's limbs,
and threw them in the water, lighted a fire beneath the kettle, and
boiled them.  And when the flesh had fallen away from the bones, he
took out the beautiful white bones, and laid them on a table, and
arranged them together in their natural order.  When he had done
that, he stepped forward and said three times, in the name of the
holy trinity, dead woman, arise.  And at the third time, the princess
arose, living, healthy and beautiful.

Then the king was in the greatest joy, and said to St. Peter, ask for
your reward.  Even if it were half my kingdom, I would give it.  But
St. Peter said, I want nothing for it.  Oh, you tomfool, thought
brother lustig to himself, and nudged his comrade's side, and said,
don't be so stupid. If you have no need of anything, I have.  St.
Peter, however, would have nothing, but as the king saw that the
other would very much like to have something, he ordered his
treasurer to fill brother lustig's knapsack with gold.

Then they went on their way, and when they came to a forest, St.
Peter said to brother lustig, now, we will divide the gold.  Yes, he
replied, we will.  So St. Peter divided the gold, and divided it into
three heaps.  Brother lustig thought to himself, what crazy idea has
he got in his head now.  He is making three shares, and there are
only two of us.  But St. Peter said, I have divided it exactly.
There is one share for me, one for you and one for him who ate the
lamb's heart.

Oh, I ate that, replied brother lustig, and hastily swept up the
gold.  You may trust what I say.  But how can that be true, said St.
Peter, when a lamb has no heart.  Eh, what, brother, what can you be
thinking of.  Lambs have hearts like other animals, why should only
they have none.  Well, so be it, said St. Peter, keep the gold to
yourself, but I will stay with you no longer.  I will go my way
alone.  As you like, dear brother, answered brother lustig.
Farewell.

Then St. Peter went a different road, but brother lustig thought, it
is a good thing that he has taken himself off, he is certainly a
strange saint.  Then he had money enough, but did not know how to
manage it, squandered it, gave it away, and and when some time had
gone by, once more had nothing.  Then he arrived in a certain country
where he heard that a king's daughter was dead.

Oh, ho, thought he, that may be a good thing for me.  I will bring
her to life again, and see that I am paid as I ought to be.  So he
went to the king, and offered to raise the dead girl to life again.
Now the king had heard that a discharged soldier was traveling about
and bringing dead persons to life again, and thought that brother
lustig was the man.  But as he had no confidence in him, he consulted
his councillors first, who said that he might give it a trial as his
daughter was dead.

Then brother lustig ordered water to be brought to him in a kettle,
bade every one go out, cut the limbs off, threw them in the water and
lighted a fire beneath, just as he had seen St. Peter do.  The water
began to boil, the flesh fell off, and then he took the bones out and
laid them on the table, but he did not know the order in which to lay
them, and placed them all wrong and in confusion.  Then he stood
before them and said, in the name of the most holy trinity, dead
maiden, I bid you arise, and he said this thrice, but the bones did
not stir. So he said it thrice more, but also in vain.  Confounded
girl that you are, get up, cried he, get up, or it shall be the worse
for you.

When he had said that, St. Peter suddenly appeared in his former
shape as a discharged soldier.  He entered by the window and said,
godless man, what are you doing.  How can the dead maiden arise, when
you have thrown about her bones in such confusion.  Dear brother, I
have done everything to the best of my ability, he answered.  This
once, I will help you out of your difficulty, but one thing I tell
you, and that is that if ever you undertake anything of the kind
again, it will be the worse for you, and also that you must neither
demand nor accept the smallest thing from the king for this.

Thereupon St. Peter laid the bones in their right order, said to the
maiden three times, in the name of the most holy trinity, dead
maiden, arise, and the king's daughter arose, healthy and beautiful
as before.  Then St. Peter went away again by the window, and brother
lustig was rejoiced to find that all had passed off so well, but was
very much vexed to think that after all he was not to take anything
for it.  I should just like to know, thought he, what fancy that
fellow has got in his head, for what he gives with one hand he takes
away with the other - there is no sense whatever in it.

Then the king offered brother lustig whatsoever he wished to have,
but he did not dare to take anything.  However, by hints and cunning,
he contrived to make the king order his knapsack to be filled with
gold for him, and with that he departed.  When he got out, St. Peter
was standing by the door, and said, just look what a man you are.
Did I not forbid you to take anything, and there you have your
knapsack full of gold.  How can I help that, answered brother lustig,
if people will put it in for me.  Well, I tell you this, that if ever
you set about anything of this kind again you shall suffer for it.
All right, brother, have no fear, now I have money, why should I
trouble myself with washing bones.  Faith, said St. Peter, a long
time that gold will last.  In order that after this you may never
tread in forbidden paths, I will bestow on your knapsack this
property, namely, that whatsoever you wish to have inside it, shall
be there.  Farewell, you will now never see me more.  Good-bye, said
brother lustig, and thought to himself, I am very glad that you have
taken yourself off, you strange fellow.  I shall certainly not follow
you.  But of the magical power which had been bestowed on his
knapsack, he thought no more.

Brother lustig traveled about with his money, and squandered and
wasted what he had as before.  When at last he had no more than four
kreuzers, he passed by an inn and thought, the money must go, and
ordered three kreuzers, worth of wine and one kreuzer's worth of
bread for himself.  As he was sitting there drinking, the smell of
roast goose made its way to his nose.

Brother lustig looked about and peeped, and saw that the host had two
geese roasting in the oven.  Then he remembered that his comrade had
said that whatsoever he wished to have in his knapsack should be
there, so he said, oh, ho.  I must try that with the geese.  So he
went out, and when he was outside the door, he said, I wish those two
roasted geese out of the oven and in my knapsack, and when he had
said that, he unbuckled it and looked in, and there they were inside
it.  Ah, that's right, said he, now I am a made man, and went away to
a meadow and took out the roast meat.

When he was in the midst of his meal, two journeymen came up and
looked at the second goose, which was not yet touched, with hungry
eyes.  Brother lustig thought to himself, one is enough for me, and
called the two men up and said, take the goose, and eat it to my
health.  They thanked him, and went with it to the inn, ordered
themselves a half bottle of wine and a loaf, took out the goose which
had been given them, and began to eat.

The hostess saw them and said to her husband, those two are eating a
goose.  Just look and see if it is not one of ours, out of the oven.
The landlord ran thither, and behold the oven was empty.  What, cried
he, you thievish crew, you want to eat goose as cheap as that.  Pay
for it this moment, or I will wash you well with green hazel-sap.
The two said, we are no thieves, a discharged soldier gave us the
goose, outside there in the meadow.  You shall not throw dust in my
eyes that way. The soldier was here, but he went out by the door,
like an honest fellow.  I looked after him myself.  You are the
thieves and shall pay.  But as they could not pay, he took a stick,
and cudgeled them out of the house.

Brother lustig went his way and came to a place where there was a
magnificent castle, and not far from it a wretched inn. He went to
the inn and asked for a night's lodging, but the landlord turned him
away, and said, there is no more room here, the house is full of
noble guests.  It surprises me that they should come to you and not
go to that splendid castle, said brother lustig.  Ah, indeed, replied
the host, but it is no slight matter to sleep there for a night.  No
one who has tried it so far, has ever come out of it alive.

If others have tried it, said brother lustig, I will try it too.
Leave it alone, said the host, it will cost you your neck.  It won't
kill me at once, said brother lustig, just give me the key, and some
good food and wine.  So the host gave him the key, and food and wine,
and with this brother lustig went into the castle, enjoyed his
supper, and at length, as he was sleepy, he lay down on the ground,
for there was no bed.  He soon fell asleep, but during the night was
disturbed by a great noise, and when he awoke, he saw nine ugly
devils in the room, who had made a circle, and were dancing around
him.

Brother lustig said, well, dance as long as you like, but none of you
must come too close.  But the devils pressed continually nearer to
him, and almost stepped on his face with their hideous feet.  Stop,
you devils, ghosts, said he, but they behaved still worse.  Then
brother lustig grew angry, and cried, stop.  You'll soon see how I
can make you quiet, and got the leg of a chair and struck out into
the midst of them with it.  But nine devils against one soldier were
still too many, and when he struck those in front of him, the others
seized him behind by the hair, and tore it unmercifully.

Devils, crew, cried he, this is too much, but just wait.  Into my
knapsack, all nine of you.  In an instant they were in it, and then
he buckled it up and threw it into a corner.  After this all was
suddenly quiet, and brother lustig lay down again, and slept till it
was bright day.

Then came the inn-keeper, and the nobleman to whom the castle
belonged, to see how he had fared.  But when they perceived that he
was merry and well they were astonished, and asked, have the spirits
done you no harm, then.  The reason why they have not, answered
brother lustig, is because I have got the whole nine of them in my
knapsack.

You may once more inhabit your castle quite tranquilly, none of them
will ever haunt it again.  The nobleman thanked him, made him rich
presents, and begged him to remain in his service, and he would
provide for him as long as he lived.  No, replied brother lustig, I
am used to wandering about, I will travel farther.

Then he went away, and entered into a smithy, laid the knapsack,
which contained the nine devils on the anvil, and asked the smith and
his apprentices to strike it. So they smote with their great hammers
with all their strength, and the devils uttered howls which were
quite pitiable.  When he opened the knapsack after this, eight of
them were dead, but one which had been lying in a fold of it, was
still alive, slipped out, and went back again to hell.

Thereupon brother lustig traveled a long time about the world, and
those who know, can tell many a story about him.  But at last he grew
old, and thought of his end, so he went to a hermit who was known to
be a pious man, and said to him, I am tired of wandering about, and
want now to behave in such a manner that I shall enter into the
kingdom of heaven.  The hermit replied, there are two roads, one is
broad and pleasant, and leads to hell, the other is narrow and rough,
and leads to heaven.  I should be a fool, thought brother lustig, if
I were to take the narrow, rough road.

So he set out and took the broad and pleasant road, and at length
came to a great black door, which was the door of hell.  Brother
lustig knocked, and the door-keeper peeped out to see who was there.
But when he saw brother lustig, he was terrified, for he was the very
same ninth devil who had been shut up in the knapsack, and had
escaped from it with a black eye.

So he pushed the bolt in again as quickly as he could, ran to the
highest devil, and said, there is a fellow outside with a knapsack,
who wants to come in, but as you value your lives don't allow him to
enter, or he will wish the whole of hell into his knapsack.  He once
gave me a frightful hammering when I was inside it.

So they called out to brother lustig that he was to go away again,
for he should not get in there.  If they won't have me here, thought
he, I will see if I can find a place for myself in heaven, for I must
stay somewhere.

So he turned about and went onwards until he came to the door of
heaven, where he knocked.  St. Peter was sitting hard by as
door-keeper.  Brother lustig recognized him at once, and thought,
here I find an old friend, I shall get on better.  But St. Peter
said, I can hardly believe that you want to come into heaven.  Let me
in, brother.  I must get in somewhere.  If they would have taken me
into hell, I should not have come here.  No, said St. Peter, you
shall not enter.  Then if you will not let me in, take your knapsack
back, for I will have nothing at all from you.  Give it here, then,
said St. Peter.  Then brother lustig gave him the knapsack into
heaven through the bars, and St. Peter took it, and hung it beside
his seat.  Then said brother lustig, and now I wish myself inside my
knapsack, and in a second he was in it, and in heaven, and St. Peter
was forced to let him stay there.
Hans had served his master for seven years, so he said to him,
master, my time is up, now I should be glad to go back home to my
mother, give me my wages.  The master answered, you have served me
faithfully and honestly, as the service was so shall the reward be.
And he gave Hans a piece of gold as big as his head.  Hans pulled his
handkerchief out of his pocket, wrapped up the lump in it, put it on
his shoulder, and set out on the way home.

As he went on, always putting one foot before the other, he saw a
horseman trotting quickly and merrily by on a lively horse.  Ah, said
Hans quite loud, what a fine thing it is to ride.  There you sit as
on a chair, you stumble over no stones, you save your shoes, and
cover the ground, you don't know how.

The rider, who had heard him, stopped and called out, hi, there,
Hans, why do you go on foot, then.

I must, answered he, for I have this lump to carry home, it is true
that it is gold, but I cannot hold my head straight for it, and it
hurts my shoulder.

I will tell you what, said the rider, we will exchange, I will give
you my horse, and you can give me your lump. With all my heart, said
Hans, but I can tell you, you will have to crawl along with it.

The rider got down, took the gold, and helped Hans up, then gave him
the bridle tight in his hands and said, if you want to go at a really
good pace, you must click your tongue and call out, jup.  Jup.

Hans was heartily delighted as he sat upon the horse and rode away so
bold and free.  After a little while he thought that it ought to go
faster, and he began to click with his tongue and call out, jup.
Jup.  The horse put himself into a sharp trot, and before Hans knew
where he was, he was thrown off and lying in a ditch which separated
the field from the highway.  The horse would have gone off too if it
had not been stopped by a countryman, who was coming along the road
and driving a cow before him.

Hans pulled himself together and stood up on his legs again, but he
was vexed, and said to the countryman, it is a poor joke, this
riding, especially when one gets hold of a mare like this, that kicks
and throws one off, so that one has a chance of breaking one's neck.
Never again will I mount it.  Now I like your cow, for one can walk
quietly behind her, and have, over and above, one's milk, butter and
cheese every day without fail.  What would I not give to have such a
cow.  Well, said the countryman, if it would give you so much
pleasure, I do not mind giving the cow for the horse.  Hans agreed
with the greatest delight, the countryman jumped upon the horse, and
rode quickly away.

Hans drove his cow quietly before him, and thought over his lucky
bargain.  If only I have a morsel of bread - and that can hardly fail
me - I can eat butter and cheese with it as often as I like, if I am
thirsty, I can milk my cow and drink the milk.  My goodness, what
more can I want.

When he came to an inn he made a halt, and in his great concern ate
up what he had with him - his dinner and supper - and all he had, and
with his last few farthings had half a glass of beer. Then he drove
his cow onwards along the road to his mother's village.

As it drew nearer mid-day, the heat was more oppressive, and Hans
found himself upon a moor which it took about an hour to cross.  He
felt it very hot and his tongue clave to the roof of his mouth with
thirst.  I can find a cure for this, thought Hans, I will milk the
cow now and refresh myself with the milk. He tied her to a withered
tree, and as he had no pail he put his leather cap underneath, but
try as he would, not a drop of milk came.  And as he set himself to
work in a clumsy way, the impatient beast at last gave him such a
blow on his head with its hind foot, that he fell on the ground, and
for a long time could not think where he was.

By good fortune a butcher just then came along the road with a
wheel-barrow, in which lay a young pig.  What sort of a trick is
this, cried he, and helped the good Hans up.  Hans told him what had
happened.  The butcher gave him his flask and said, take a drink and
refresh yourself.  The cow will certainly give no milk, it is an old
beast, at the best it is only fit for the plough, or for the butcher.
Well, well, said Hans, as he stroked his hair down on his head, who
would have thought it.  Certainly it is a fine thing when one can
kill a beast like that at home, what meat one has.  But I do not care
much for beef, it is not juicy enough for me.  A young pig like that
now is the thing to have, it tastes quite different, and then there
are the sausages.

Listen, Hans, said the butcher, out of love for you I will exchange,
and will let you have the pig for the cow.  Heaven repay you for your
kindness, said Hans as he gave up the cow, whilst the pig was unbound
from the barrow, and the cord by which it was tied was put in his
hand.

Hans went on, and thought to himself how everything was going just as
he wished, if he did meet with any vexation it was immediately set
right.  Presently there joined him a lad who was carrying a fine
white goose under his arm.  They said good morning to each other, and
Hans began to tell of his good luck, and how he had always made such
good bargains.  The boy told him that he was taking the goose to a
christening-feast.  Just lift her, added he, and laid hold of her by
the wings, how heavy she is - she has been fattened up for the last
eight weeks.  Whosoever has a bit of her when she is roasted will
have to wipe the fat from both sides of his mouth.  Yes, said Hans,
as he weighed her in one hand, she is a good weight, but my pig is no
bad one.

Meanwhile the lad looked suspiciously from one side to the other, and
shook his head.  Look here, he said at length, it may not be all
right with your pig.  In the village through which I passed, the
mayor himself had just had one stolen out of its sty.  I fear - I
fear that you have got hold of it there.  They have sent out some
people and it would be a bad business if they caught you with the
pig, at the very least, you would be shut up in the dark hole.

The good Hans was terrified.  Goodness, he said, help me out of this
fix, you know more about this place than I do, take my pig and leave
me your goose.  I shall risk something at that game, answered the
lad, but I will not be the cause of your getting into trouble.  So he
took the cord in his hand, and drove away the pig quickly along a
by-path.

The good Hans, free from care, went homewards with the goose under
his arm.  When I think over it properly, said he to himself, I have
even gained by the exchange.  First there is the good roast meat,
then the quantity of fat which will drip from it, and which will give
me dripping for my bread for a quarter of a year, and lastly the
beautiful white feathers.  I will have my pillow stuffed with them,
and then indeed I shall go to sleep without rocking.  How glad my
mother will be.

As he was going through the last village, there stood a
scissors-grinder with his barrow, as his wheel whirred he sang,
     I sharpen scissors and quickly grind,
     my coat blows out in the wind behind.

Hans stood still and looked at him, at last he spoke to him and said,
all's well with you, as you are so merry with your grinding. Yes,
answered the scissors-grinder, the trade has a golden foundation.  A
real grinder is a man who as often as he puts his hand into his
pocket finds gold in it.  But where did you buy that fine goose?

I did not buy it, but exchanged my pig for it.

And the pig?

That I got for a cow.

And the cow?

I took that instead of a horse.

And the horse?

For that I gave a lump of gold as big as my head.

And the gold?

Well, that was my wages for seven years, service.

You have known how to look after yourself each time, said the
grinder.  If you can only get on so far as to hear the money jingle
in your pocket whenever you stand up, you will have made your
fortune.

How shall I manage that, said Hans.  You must be a grinder, as I am,
nothing particular is wanted for it but a grindstone, the rest finds
itself.  I have one here, it is certainly a little worn, but you need
not give me anything for it but your goose, will you do it?

How can you ask, answered Hans.  I shall be the luckiest fellow on
earth.  If I have money whenever I put my hand in my pocket, why
should I ever worry again.  And he handed him the goose and received
the grindstone in exchange.  Now, said the grinder, as he took up an
ordinary heavy stone that lay by him, here is a strong stone for you
into the bargain, you can hammer well upon it, and straighten your
old nails.  Take it with you and keep it carefully. Hans loaded
himself with the stones, and went on with a contented heart, his eyes
shining with joy.  I must have been born with a caul, he cried,
everything I want happens to me just as if I were a sunday-child.

Meanwhile, as he had been on his legs since daybreak, he began to
feel tired.  Hunger also tormented him, for in his joy at the bargain
by which he got the cow he had eaten up all his store of food at
once.  At last he could only go on with great trouble, and was forced
to stop every minute, the stones, too, weighed him down dreadfully.
Then he could not help thinking how nice it would be if he had not to
carry them just then.

He crept like a snail to a well in a field, and there he thought that
he would rest and refresh himself with a cool draught of water, but
in order that he might not injure the stones in sitting down, he laid
them carefully by his side on the edge of the well. Then he sat down
on it, and was to stoop and drink, when he made a slip, pushed
against the stones, and both of them fell into the water.  When Hans
saw them with his own eyes sinking to the bottom, he jumped for joy,
and then knelt down, and with tears in his eyes thanked God for
having shown him this favor also, and delivered him in so good a way,
and without his having any need to reproach himself, from those heavy
stones which had been the only things that troubled him.

There is no man under the sun so fortunate as I, he cried out. With a
light heart and free from every burden he now ran on until he was
with his mother at home.
There was once upon a time a young peasant named Hans, whose uncle
wanted to find him a rich wife.  He therefore seated Hans behind the
stove, and had it made very hot.  Then he fetched a pot of milk and
plenty of white bread, gave him a bright newly-coined farthing in his
hand, and said, Hans, hold that farthing fast, crumble the white
bread into the milk, and stay where you are, and do not stir from
that spot till I come back.  Yes, said Hans,

I will do all that.  Then the uncle put on a pair of old patched
trousers, went to a rich peasant's daughter in the next village, and
said, won't you marry my nephew Hans.  You will get an honest and
sensible man who will suit you.  The covetous father asked, how is it
with regard to his means.  Has he bread to break?

Dear friend, replied the uncle, my young nephew has a snug berth, a
nice bit of money in hand, and plenty of bread to break, besides he
has quite as many patches as I have.  And as he spoke, he slapped the
patches on his trousers, but in that district small pieces of land
were called patches also.  If you will give yourself the trouble to
go home with me, you shall see at once that all is as I have said.
Then the miser did not want to lose this good opportunity, and said,
if that is the case, I have nothing further to say against the
marriage.

So the wedding was celebrated on the appointed day, and when the
young wife went out of doors to see the bridegroom's property, Hans
took off his sunday coat and put on his patched smock and said, I
might spoil my good coat.  Then together they went out and wherever a
vineyard came in sight, or fields and meadows were divided from each
other, Hans pointed with his finger and then slapped either a large
or a small patch on his smock, and said, that patch is mine, and that
too, my dearest, just look at it. Meaning thereby that his wife
should not stare at the broad land, but look at his garment, which
was his own.

Were you at the wedding too?  Yes, indeed I was there, and in full
dress.  My head-dress was of snow, then the sun came out, and it was
melted.  My coat was of cobwebs, and I had to pass by some thorns
which tore it off me, my shoes were of glass, and I trod on a stone
and they said, klink, and broke in two.

There was once a poor man and a poor woman who had nothing but a
little cottage, and who earned their bread by fishing, and always
lived from hand to mouth.  But it came to pass one day when the man
was sitting by the water-side, and casting his net, that he drew out
a fish entirely of gold.  As he was looking at the fish, full of
astonishment, it began to speak and said, listen, fisherman, if you
will throw me back again into the water, I will change your little
hut into a splendid castle.

Then the fisherman answered, of what use is a castle to me, if I have
nothing to eat.  The gold fish continued, that shall be taken care
of, there will be a cupboard in the castle in which, when you open
it, shall be dishes of the most delicate meats, and as many of them
as you can desire.  If that be true, said the man, then I can well do
you a favor.  Yes, said the fish, there is, however, the condition
that you shall disclose to no one in the world, whosoever he may be,
whence your good luck has come, if you speak but one single word, all
will be over.  Then the man threw the wonderful fish back again into
the water, and went home.

But where his hovel had formerly stood, now stood a great castle. He
opened wide his eyes, entered, and saw his wife dressed in beautiful
clothes, sitting in a splendid room, and she was quite delighted, and
said, husband, how has all this come to pass.  It suits me very well.
Yes, said the man, it suits me too, but I am frightfully hungry, just
give me something to eat.  Said the wife, but I have got nothing and
don't know where to find anything in this new house.  There is no
need of your knowing, said the man, for I see yonder a great
cupboard, just unlock it. When she opened it, there stood cakes,
meat, fruit, wine, quite a bright prospect.

Then the woman cried joyfully, what more can you want, my dear. And
they sat down, and ate and drank together.  When they had had enough,
the woman said, but husband, whence come all these riches. Alas,
answered he, do not question me about it, for I dare not tell you
anything.  If I disclose it to anyone, then all our good fortune will
disappear.  Very good, said she, if I am not to know anything, then I
do not want to know anything.  However, she was not in earnest.  She
never rested day or night, and she goaded her husband until in his
impatience he revealed that all was owing to a wonderful golden fish
which he had caught, and to which in return he had given its liberty.
And as soon as the secret was out, the splendid castle with the
cupboard immediately disappeared, they were once more in the old
fisherman's hut, and the man was obliged to follow his former trade
and fish.

But fortune would so have it, that he once more drew out the golden
fish.  Listen, said the fish, if you will throw me back into the
water again, I will once more give you the castle with the cupboard
full of roast and boiled meats.  Only be firm, for your life's sake
don't reveal from whom you have it, or you will lose it all again.  I
will take good care, answered the fisherman, and threw the fish back
into the water.  Now at home everything was once more in its former
magnificence, and the wife was overjoyed at their good fortune, but
curiosity left her no peace, so that after a couple of days she began
to ask again how it had come to pass, and how he had managed to
secure it.  The man kept silence for a short time, but at last she
made him so angry that he broke out, and betrayed the secret.

In an instant the castle disappeared, and they were back again in
their old hut.  Now you have got what you want, said he, and we can
gnaw at a bare bone again.  Ah, said the woman, I had rather not have
riches if I am not to know from whom they come, for then I have no
peace.

The man went back to fish, and after a while he chanced to draw out
the gold fish for a third time.  Listen, said the fish, I see very
well that I am fated to fall into your hands, take me home and cut me
into six pieces.  Give your wife two of them to eat, two to your
horse and bury two of them in the ground, then they will bring you a
blessing.  The fisherman took the fish home with him, and did as it
had bidden him.  It came to pass, however, that from the two pieces
that were buried in the ground two golden lilies sprang up, that the
horse had two golden foals, and the fisherman's wife bore two
children who were made entirely of gold.  The children grew up,
became tall and handsome, and the lilies and horses grew likewise.
Then they said, father, we want to mount our golden steeds and travel
out in the world.  But he answered sorrowfully, how shall I bear it
if you go away, and I know not how it fares with you.  Then they
said, the two golden lilies remain here.  By them you can see how it
is with us.  If they are fresh, then we are in health.  If they are
withered, we are ill.  If they perish, then we are dead.

So they rode forth and came to an inn, in which were many people, and
when they perceived the gold-children they began to laugh, and jeer.
When one of them heard the mocking he felt ashamed and would not go
out into the world, but turned back and went home again to his
father.  But the other rode forward and reached a great forest. As he
was about to enter it, the people said, it is not safe for you to
ride through, the wood is full of robbers who would treat you badly.
You will fare ill, and when they see that you are all of gold, and
your horse likewise, they will assuredly kill you.

But he would not allow himself to be frightened, and said, I must and
will ride through it.  Then he took bear-skins and covered himself
and his horse with them, so that the gold was no more to be seen, and
rode fearlessly into the forest.  When he had ridden onward a little
he heard a rustling in the bushes, and heard voices speaking
together.  From one side came cries of, there is one, but from the
other, let him go, 'tis a bearskin, as poor and bare as a
church-mouse, what should we gain from him.  So the gold-child rode
joyfully through the forest, and no evil befell him.

One day he entered a village wherein he saw a maiden, who was so
beautiful that he did not believe that any more beautiful than she
existed in the world.  And as such a mighty love took possession of
him, he went up to her and said, I love you with my whole heart, will
you be my wife.  He, too, pleased the maiden so much that she agreed
and said, yes, I will be your wife, and be true to you my whole life
long.

Then they were married, and just as they were in the greatest
happiness, home came the father of the bride, and when he saw that
his daughter's wedding was being celebrated, he was astonished, and
said, where is the bridegroom.  They showed him the gold-child, who,
however, still wore his bear-skins.  Then the father said wrathfully,
a bearskin shall never have my daughter.  And was about to kill him.
Then the bride begged as hard as she could, and said, he is my
husband, and I love him with all my heart.  Until at last he allowed
himself to be appeased.  Nevertheless the idea never left his
thoughts, so that next morning he rose early, wishing to see whether
his daughter's husband was a common ragged beggar.  But when he
peeped in, he saw a magnificent golden man in the bed, and the
cast-off bear-skins lying on the ground.  Then he went back and
thought, what a good thing it was that I restrained my anger.  I
would have committed a great crime.

But the gold-child dreamed that he rode out to hunt a splendid stag,
and when he awoke in the morning, he said to his wife, I must go out
hunting.  She was uneasy, and begged him to stay there, and said, you
might easily meet with a great misfortune.  But he answered, I must
and will go.

Thereupon he got up, and rode forth into the forest, and it was not
long before a fine stag crossed his path exactly according to his
dream.  He aimed and was about to shoot it, when the stag ran away.
He gave chase over hedges and ditches for the whole day without
feeling tired, but in the evening the stag vanished from his sight,
and when the gold-child looked round him, he was standing before a
little house, wherein sat a witch.

He knocked and a little old woman came out and asked, what are you
doing so late in the midst of the great forest.  Have you not seen a
stag. Yes, answered she, I know the stag well.  And thereupon a
little dog which had come out of the house with her, barked at the
man violently.  Will you be silent, you odious toad, said he, or I
will shoot you dead.  Then the witch cried out in a passion, what
will you slay my little dog.  And immediately transformed him, so
that he lay like a stone, and his bride awaited him in vain and
thought, that which I so greatly dreaded, which lay so heavily on my
heart, has come upon him.

But at home the other brother was standing by the gold-lilies, when
one of them suddenly drooped. Good heavens, said he, my brother has
met with some great misfortune I must away to see if I can possibly
rescue him.  Then the father said, stay here, if I lose you also,
what shall I do. But he answered, I must and will go forth.

Then he mounted his golden horse, and rode forth and entered the
great forest, where his brother lay turned to stone.  The old witch
came out of her house and called him, wishing to entrap him also, but
he did not go near her, and said, I will shoot you, if you will not
bring my brother to life again.  She touched the stone, though very
unwillingly, with her forefinger, and he was immediately restored to
his human shape.  And the two gold-children rejoiced when they saw
each other again, kissed and caressed each other, and rode away
together out of the forest the one home to his bride, and the other
to his father.

The father then said, I knew well that you had rescued your brother,
for the golden lily suddenly rose up and blossomed out again. Then
they lived happily, and they prospered until their death.
There was once upon a time a man who was about to set out on a long
journey, and on parting he asked his three daughters what he should
bring back with him for them.  Whereupon the eldest wished for
pearls, the second wished for diamonds, but the third said, dear
father, I should like a singing, soaring lark.  The father said, yes,
if I can get it, you shall have it, kissed all three, and set out.

Now when the time had come for him to be on his way home again, he
had brought pearls and diamonds for the two eldest, but he had sought
everywhere in vain for a singing, soaring lark for the youngest, and
he was very unhappy about it, for she was his favorite child.  Then
his road lay through a forest, and in the midst of it was a splendid
castle, and near the castle stood a tree, but quite on the top of the
tree, he saw a singing, soaring lark.  Aha, you come just at the
right moment, he said, quite delighted, and called to his servant to
climb up and catch the little creature.

But as he approached the tree, a lion leapt from beneath it, shook
himself, and roared till the leaves on the trees trembled.  He who
tries to steal my singing, soaring lark, he cried, will I devour.
Then the man said, I did not know that the bird belonged to you.  I
will make amends for the wrong I have done and ransom myself with a
large sum of money, only spare my life.  The lion said, nothing can
save you, unless you will promise to give me for my own what first
meets you on your return home, and if you will do that, I will grant
you your life, and you shall have the bird for your daughter, into
the bargain.  But the man hesitated and said, that might be my
youngest daughter, she loves me best, and always runs to meet me on
my return home.

The servant, however, was terrified and said, why should your
daughter be the very one to meet you, it might as easily be a cat, or
dog. Then the man allowed himself to be persuaded, took the singing,
soaring lark, and promised to give the lion whatsoever should first
meet him on his return home.

When he reached home and entered his house, the first who met him was
no other than his youngest and dearest daughter, who came running up,
kissed and embraced him, and when she saw that he had brought with
him a singing, soaring lark, she was beside herself with joy.  The
father, however, could not rejoice, but began to weep, and said, my
dearest child, I have bought the little bird dear.  In return for it,
I have been obliged to promise you to a savage lion, and when he has
you he will tear you in pieces and devour you, and he told her all,
just as it had happened, and begged her not to go there, come what
might.

But she consoled him and said, dearest father, indeed your promise
must be fulfilled.  I will go thither and soften the lion, so that I
may return to you safely.  Next morning she had the road pointed out
to her, took leave, and went fearlessly out into the forest.  The
lion, however, was an enchanted prince and was by day a lion, and all
his people were lions with him, but in the night they resumed their
natural human shapes.

On her arrival she was kindly received and led into the castle.  When
night came, the lion turned into a handsome man, and their wedding
was celebrated with great magnificence.  They lived happily together,
remained awake at night, and slept in the daytime.  One day he came
and said, to-morrow there is a feast in your father's house, because
your eldest sister is to be married, and if you are inclined to go
there, my lions shall conduct you.  She said, yes, I should very much
like to see my father again, and went thither, accompanied by the
lions.

There was great joy when she arrived, for they had all believed that
she had been torn in pieces by the lion, and had long ceased to live.
But she told them what a handsome husband she had, and how well off
she was, remained with them while the wedding-feast lasted, and then
went back again to the forest.

When the second daughter was about to be married, and she was again
invited to the wedding, she said to the lion, this time I will not be
alone, you must come with me.  The lion, however, said that it was
too dangerous for him, for if when there a ray from a burning candle
fell on him, he would be changed into a dove, and for seven years
long would have to fly about with the doves.  She said, ah, but do
come with me, I will take great care of you, and guard you from all
light.  So they went away together, and took with them their little
child as well.

She had a room built there, so strong and thick that no ray could
pierce through it, in this he was to shut himself up when the candles
were lit for the wedding-feast.  But the door was made of green wood
which warped and left a little crack which no one noticed.  The
wedding was celebrated with magnificence, but when the procession
with all its candles and torches came back from church, and passed by
this apartment, a ray touched him, he was transformed in an instant,
and when she came in and looked for him, she did not see him, but a
white dove was sitting there.  The dove said to her, for seven years
must I fly about the world, but at every seventh step that you take I
will let fall a drop of red blood and a white feather, and these will
show you the way, and if you follow the trace you can release me.
Thereupon the dove flew out at the door, and she followed him, and at
every seventh step a red drop of blood and a little white feather
fell down and showed her the way.

So she went continually further and further in the wide world, never
looking about her or resting, and the seven years were almost past,
then she rejoiced and thought that they would soon be saved, and yet
they were so far from it.  Once when they were thus moving onwards,
no little feather and no drop of red blood fell, and when she raised
her eyes the dove had disappeared.  And as she thought to herself, in
this no man can help you, she climbed up to the sun, and said to him,
you shine into every crevice, and over every peak, have you not seen
a white dove flying.

No, said the sun, I have seen none, but I present you with a casket,
open it when you are in sorest need.  Then she thanked the sun, and
went on until evening came and the moon appeared, she then asked her,
you shine the whole night through, and on every field and forest,
have you not seen a white dove flying.

No, said the moon, I have seen no dove, but here I give you an egg,
break it when you are in great need.  She thanked the moon, and went
on until the night wind came up and blew on her, then she said to it,
you blow over every tree and under every leaf, have you not seen a
white dove flying.  No, said the night wind, I have seen none, but I
will ask the three other winds, perhaps they have seen it.

The east wind and the west wind came, and had seen nothing, but the
south wind said, I have seen the white dove, it has flown to the red
sea, where it has become a lion again, for the seven years are over,
and the lion is there fighting with a dragon, the dragon, however, is
an enchanted princess.  The night wind then said to her, I will
advise you, go to the red sea, on the right bank are some tall reeds,
count them, break off the eleventh, and strike the dragon with it,
then the lion will be able to subdue it, and both then will regain
their human form.  After that, look round and you will see the
griffin which is by the red sea, swing yourself, with your beloved,
on to his back, and the bird will carry you over the sea to your own
home.  Here is a nut for you, when you are above the center of the
sea, let the nut fall, it will immediately shoot up, and a tall
nut-tree will grow out of the water on which the griffin may rest,
for if he cannot rest, he will not be strong enough to carry you
across, and if you forget to throw down the nut, he will let you fall
into the sea.

Then she went thither, and found everything as the night wind had
said.  She counted the reeds by the sea, and cut off the eleventh,
struck the dragon therewith, whereupon the lion conquered it, and
immediately both of them regained their human shapes.  But when the
princess, who hitherto had been the dragon, was released from
enchantment, she took the youth by the arm, seated herself on the
griffin, and carried him off with her.

There stood the poor maiden who had wandered so far and was again
forsaken.  She sat down and cried, but at last she took courage and
said, still I will go as far as the wind blows and as long as the
cock crows, until I find him, and she went forth by long, long roads,
until at last she came to the castle where both of them were living
together, there she heard that soon a feast was to be held, in which
they would celebrate their wedding, but she said, God still helps me,
and opened the casket that the sun had given her.  A dress lay
therein as brilliant as the sun itself.  So she took it out and put
it on, and went up into the castle, and everyone, even the bride
herself, looked at her with astonishment.

The dress pleased the bride so well that she thought it might do for
her wedding-dress, and asked if it was for sale.  Not for money or
land, answered she, but for flesh and blood.  The bride asked her
what she meant by that, so she said, let me sleep a night in the
chamber where the bridegroom sleeps.  The bride would not, yet wanted
very much to have the dress, at last she consented, but the page was
to give the prince a sleeping-draught.

When it was night, therefore, and the youth was already asleep, she
was led into the chamber, she seated herself on the bed and said, I
have followed after you for seven years.  I have been to the sun and
the moon, and the four winds, and have enquired for you, and have
helped you against the dragon, will you, then quite forget me.  But
the prince slept so soundly that it only seemed to him as if the wind
were whistling outside in the fir-trees.

When therefore day broke, she was led out again, and had to give up
the golden dress.  And as that even had been of no avail, she was
sad, went out into a meadow, sat down there, and wept.  While she was
sitting there, she thought of the egg which the moon had given her,
she opened it, and there came out a clucking hen with twelve chickens
all of gold, and they ran about chirping, and crept again under the
old hen's wings, nothing more beautiful was ever seen in the world.
Then she arose, and drove them through the meadow before her, until
the bride looked out of the window.

The little chickens pleased her so much that she immediately came
down and asked if they were for sale.  Not for money or land, but for
flesh and blood, let me sleep another night in the chamber where the
bridegroom sleeps.  The bride said, yes, intending to cheat her as on
the former evening.  But when the prince went to bed he asked the
page what the murmuring and rustling in the night had been.  On this
the page told all, that he had been forced to give him a
sleeping-draught, because a poor girl had slept secretly in the
chamber, and that he was to give him another that night.  The prince
said, pour out the draught by the bed-side.

At night, she was again led in, and when she began to relate how ill
all had fared with her, he immediately recognized his beloved wife by
her voice, sprang up and cried, now I really am released.  I have
been as it were in a dream, for the strange princess has bewitched me
so that I have been compelled to forget you, but God has delivered me
from the spell at the right time.

Then they both left the castle secretly in the night, for they feared
the father of the princess, who was a sorcerer, and they seated
themselves on the griffin which bore them across the red sea, and
when they were in the midst of it, she let fall the nut.  Immediately
a tall nut-tree grew up, whereon the bird rested, and then carried
them home, where they found their child, who had grown tall and
beautiful, and they lived thenceforth happily until their death.
There was once upon a time an old queen whose husband had been dead
for many years, and she had a beautiful daughter.  When the princess
grew up she was betrothed to a prince who lived at a great distance.
When the time came for her to be married, and she had to journey
forth into the distant kingdom, the aged queen packed up for her many
costly vessels of silver and gold, and trinkets also of gold and
silver, and cups and jewels, in short, everything which appertained
to a royal dowry, for she loved her child with all her heart.

She likewise sent her maid-in-waiting, who was to ride with her, and
hand her over to the bridegroom, and each had a horse for the
journey, but the horse of the king's daughter was called falada, and
could speak.  So when the hour of parting had come, the aged mother
went into her bedroom, took a small knife and cut her finger with it
until it bled.  Then she held a white handkerchief to it into which
she let three drops of blood fall, gave it to her daughter and said,
dear child, preserve this carefully, it will be of service to you on
your way.

So they took a sorrowful leave of each other, the princess put the
piece of cloth in her bosom, mounted her horse, and then went away to
her bridegroom.  After she had ridden for a while she felt a burning
thirst, and said to her waiting-maid, dismount, and take my cup which
you have brought with you for me, and get me some water from the
stream, for I should like to drink.  If you are thirsty, said the
waiting-maid, get off your horse yourself, and lie down and drink out
of the water, I don't choose to be your servant.

So in her great thirst the princess alighted, bent down over the
water in the stream and drank, and was not allowed to drink out of
the golden cup.  Then she said, ah, heaven, and the three drops of
blood answered, if this your mother knew, her heart would break in
two.  But the king's daughter was humble, said nothing, and mounted
her horse again.

She rode some miles further, but the day was warm, the sun scorched
her, and she was thirsty once more, and when they came to a stream of
water, she again cried to her waiting-maid, dismount, and give me
some water in my golden cup, for she had long ago forgotten the
girl's ill words.  But the waiting-maid said still more haughtily, if
you wish to drink, get it yourself, I don't choose to be your maid.
Then in her great thirst the king's daughter alighted, bent over the
flowing stream, wept and said, ah, heaven, and the drops of blood
again replied, if this your mother knew, her heart would break in
two.

And as she was thus drinking and leaning right over the stream, the
handkerchief with the three drops of blood fell out of her bosom, and
floated away with the water without her observing it, so great was
her trouble.  The waiting-maid, however, had seen it, and she
rejoiced to think that she had now power over the bride, for since
the princess had lost the drops of blood, she had become weak and
powerless.

So now when she wanted to mount her horse again, the one that was
called falada, the waiting-maid said, falada is more suitable for me,
and my nag will do for you, and the princess had to be content with
that.  Then the waiting-maid, with many hard words, bade the princess
exchange her royal apparel for her own shabby clothes, and at length
she was compelled to swear by the clear sky above her, that she would
not say one word of this to anyone at the royal court, and if she had
not taken this oath she would have been killed on the spot.  But
falada saw all this, and observed it well.

The waiting-maid now mounted falada, and the true bride the bad
horse, and thus they traveled onwards, until at length they entered
the royal palace.  There were great rejoicings over her arrival, and
the prince sprang forward to meet her, lifted the waiting-maid from
her horse, and thought she was his consort.

She was conducted upstairs, but the real princess was left standing
below.  Then the old king looked out of the window and saw her
standing in the courtyard, and noticed how dainty and delicate and
beautiful she was, and instantly went to the royal apartment, and
asked the bride about the girl she had with her who was standing down
below in the courtyard, and who she was.  I picked her up on my way
for a companion, give the girl something to work at, that she may not
stand idle.

But the old king had no work for her, and knew of none, so he said, I
have a little boy who tends the geese, she may help him.  The boy was
called conrad, and the true bride had to help him to tend the geese.
Soon afterwards the false bride said to the young king, dearest
husband, I beg you to do me a favor.  He answered, I will do so most
willingly.  Then send for the knacker, and have the head of the horse
on which I rode here cut off, for it vexed me on the way. In reality,
she was afraid that the horse might tell how she had behaved to the
king's daughter.

Then she succeeded in making the king promise that it should be done,
and the faithful falada was to die, this came to the ears of the real
princess, and she secretly promised to pay the knacker a piece of
gold if he would perform a small service for her.  There was a great
dark-looking gateway in the town, through which morning and evening
she had to pass with the geese, would he be so goood as to nail up
falada's head on it, so that she might see him again, more than once.
The knacker's man promised to do that, and cut off the head, and
nailed it fast beneath the dark gateway.

Early in the morning, when she and conrad drove out their flock
beneath this gateway, she said in passing,
          alas, falada, hanging there.

Then the head answered,
          alas, young queen, how ill you fare.
          If this your mother knew,
          her heart would break in two.

Then they went still further out of the town, and drove their geese
into the country.  And when they had come to the meadow, she sat down
and unbound her hair which was like pure gold, and conrad saw it and
delighted in its brightness, and wanted to pluck out a few hairs.
Then she said,
          blow, blow, thou gentle wind, I say,
          blow conrad's little hat away,
          and make him chase it here and there,
          until I have braided all my hair,
          and bound it up again.

And there came such a violent wind that it blew conrad's hat far away
across country, and he was forced to run after it. When he came back
she had finished combing her hair and was putting it up again, and he
could not get any of it.  Then conrad was angry, and would not speak
to her, and thus they watched the geese until the evening, and then
they went home. Next day when they were driving the geese out through
the dark gateway, the maiden said,
          alas, falada, hanging there.

Falada answered,
          alas, young queen, how ill you fare.
          If this your mother knew,
          her heart would break in two.

And she sat down again in the field and began to comb out her hair,
and conrad ran and tried to clutch it, so she said in haste,
          blow, blow, thou gentle wind, I say,
          blow conrad's little hat away,
          and make him chase it here and there,
          until I have braided all my hair,
          and bound it up again.

Then the wind blew, and blew his little hat off his head and far
away, and conrad was forced to run after it, and when he came back,
her hair had been put up a long time, and he could get none of it,
and so they looked after their geese till evening came.

But in the evening after they had got home, conrad went to the old
king, and said, I won't tend the geese with that girl any longer.
Why not, inquired the aged king.  Oh, because she vexes me the whole
day long.  Then the aged king commanded him to relate what it was
that she did to him.  And conrad said, in the morning when we pass
beneath the dark gateway with the block, there is a horse's head on
the wall, and she says to it,
          alas, falada, hanging there.

And the head replies,
          alas, young queen how ill you fare.
          If this your mother knew,
          her heart would break in two.

And conrad went on to relate what happened on the goose pasture, and
how when there he had to chase his hat.

The aged king commanded him to drive his block out again next day,
and as soon as morning came, he placed himself behind the dark
gateway, and heard how the maiden spoke to the head of falada, and
then he too went into the country, and hid himself in the thicket in
the meadow.  There he soon saw with his own eyes the goose-girl and
the goose-boy bringing their flock, and how after a while she sat
down and unplaited her hair, which shone with radiance.  And soon she
said,
          blow, blow, thou gentle wind, I say,
          blow conrad's little hat away,
          and make him chase it here and there,
          until I have braided all my hair,
          and bound it up again.

Then came a blast of wind and carried off conrad's hat, so that he
had to run far away, while the maiden quietly went on combing and
plaiting her hair, all of which the king observed.  Then, quite
unseen, he went away, and when the goose-girl came home in the
evening, he called her aside, and asked why she did all these things.
I may not tell that, and I dare not lament my sorrows to any human
being, for I have sworn not to do so by the heaven which is above me,
if I had not done that, I should have lost my life.

He urged her and left her no peace, but he could draw nothing from
her.  Then said he, if you will not tell me anything, tell your
sorrows to the iron-stove there, and he went away.  Then she crept
into the iron-stove, and began to weep and lament, and emptied her
whole heart, and said, here am I deserted by the whole world, and yet
I am a king's daughter, and a false waiting-maid has by force brought
me to such a pass that I have been compelled to put off my royal
apparel, and she has taken my place with my bridegroom, and I have to
perform menial service as a goose-girl if this my mother knew, her
heart would break in two.

The aged king, however, was standing outside by the pipe of the
stove, and was listening to what she said, and heard it. Then he came
back again, and bade her come out of the stove. And royal garments
were placed on her, and it was marvellous how beautiful she was.  The
aged king summoned his son, and revealed to him that he had got the
false bride who was only a waiting-maid, but that the true one was
standing there, as the former goose-girl.  The young king rejoiced
with all his heart when he saw her beauty and youth, and a great
feast was made ready to which all the people and all good friends
were invited.

At the head of the table sat the bridegroom with the king's daughter
at one side of him, and the waiting-maid on the other, but the
waiting-maid was blinded, and did not recognize the princess in her
dazzling array.  When they had eaten and drunk, and were merry, the
aged king asked the waiting-maid as a riddle, what punishment a
person deserved who had behaved in such and such a way to her master,
and at the same time related the whole story, and asked what sentence
such a person merited.  Then the false bride said, she deserves no
better fate than to be stripped entirely naked, and put in a barrel
which is studded inside with pointed nails, and two white horses
should be harnessed to it, which will drag her along through one
street after another, till she is dead.

It is you, said the aged king, and you have pronounced your own
sentence, and thus shall it be done unto you.  And when the sentence
had been carried out, the young king married his true bride, and both
of them reigned over their kingdom in peace and happiness.

Once upon a time a countryman had a son who was as big as a thumb,
and did not become any bigger, and during several years did not grow
one hair's breadth.  Once when the father was going out to plough,
the little one said, father, I will go out with you. You would go out
with me, said the father.  Stay here, you will be of no use out
there, besides you might get lost.  Then thumbling began to cry, and
for the sake of peace his father put him in his pocket, and took him
with him.

When he was outside in the field, he took him out again, and set him
in a freshly cut furrow.  Whilst he sat there, a great giant came
over the hill.  Do you see that great bogie, said the father, for he
wanted to frighten the little fellow to make him behave well, he is
coming to fetch you.  The giant, however, had scarcely taken two
steps with his long legs before he was in the furrow.

He took up little thumbling carefully with two fingers, examined him,
and without saying one word went away with him. His father stood by,
but could not utter a sound for terror, and he thought nothing else
but that his child was lost, and that as long as he lived he should
never set eyes on him again.

But the giant carried him home, let him suckle at his breast, and
thumbling grew and became tall and strong after the manner of giants.
When two years had passed, the old giant took him into the forest,
wanted to test him, and said, pull up a stick for yourself.  Then the
boy was already so strong that he tore up a young tree out of the
earth by the roots.  But the giant thought, we must do better than
that, took him back again, and suckled him two years longer.  When he
tested him, his strength had increased so much that he could tear an
old tree out of the ground.

That was still not enough for the giant, he again suckled him for two
years, and when he then went with him into the forest and said, now
just tear up a real stick, the boy tore up the biggest oak-tree from
the earth, so that it cracked, and that was a mere trifle to him.
Now that will do, said the giant, you are perfect.  And took him back
to the field from whence he had brought him.  His father was there
following the plough.  The young giant went up to him, and said, does
my father see what a fine man his son has grown into.

The farmer was alarmed, and said, no, you are not my son.  I don't
want you - leave me.  Truly I am your son, allow me to do your work,
I can plough as well as you, nay better.  No, no, you are not my son,
and you can not plough - go away.  However, as he was afraid of this
great man, he let go of the plough, stepped back and sat down at the
side of the land.  Then the youth took the plough, and just grasped
it with one hand, but his pressure was so strong that the plough went
deep into the earth.

The farmer could not bear to see that, and called to him, if you are
determined to plough, you must not press so hard on it, that makes
bad work.  The youth, however, unharnessed the horses, and drew the
plough himself, saying, just go home, father, and bid my mother make
ready a large dish of food, and in the meantime I will go over the
field.  Then the farmer went home, and ordered his wife to prepare
the food, but the youth ploughed the field which was two acres large,
quite alone, and then he harnessed himself to the harrow, and
harrowed the whole of the land, using two harrows at once.  When he
had done it, he went into the forest, and pulled up two oak-trees,
laid them across his shoulders, and hung on them one harrow behind
and one before, and also one horse behind and one before, and carried
all as if it had been a bundle of straw, to his parents, house.

When he entered the yard, his mother did not recognize him, and
asked, who is that horrible tall man.  The father said, that is our
son.  She said, no that cannot be our son, we never had such a tall
one, ours was a little thing.  She called to him, go away, we do not
want you.  The youth was silent, but led his horses to the stable,
gave them some oats and hay, and all that they wanted.  When he had
done this, he went into the parlor, sat down on the bench and said,
mother, now I should like something to eat, will it soon be ready?
She said, yes, and brought in two immense dishes full of food, which
would have been enough to satisfy herself and her husband for a week.
The youth, however, ate the whole of it himself, and asked if she had
nothing more to set before him.  No, she replied, that is all we
have.  But that was only a taste, I must have more.

She did not dare to oppose him, and went and put a huge pig's trough
full of food on the fire, and when it was ready, carried it in.  At
length come a few crumbs, said he, and gobbled all there was, but it
was still not sufficient to appease his hunger.  Then said he,
father, I see well that with you I shall never have food enough, if
you will get me an iron staff which is strong, and which I cannot
break against my knees, I will go out into the world.  The farmer was
glad, put his two horses in his cart, and fetched from the smith a
staff so large and thick, that the two horses could only just bring
it away.

The youth laid it across his knees, and snap, he broke it in two in
the middle like a bean-stalk, and threw it away. The father then
harnessed four horses, and brought a bar which was so long and thick,
that the four horses could only just drag it.  The son snapped this
also in twain against his knees, threw it away, and said, father,
this can be of no use to me, you must harness more horses, and bring
a stronger staff.  So the father harnessed eight horses, and brought
one which was so long and thick, that the eight horses could only
just carry it. When the son took it in his hand, he immediately
snapped off the end of it, and said, father, I see that you will not
be able to procure me any such staff as I want, I will remain no
longer with you.

So he went away, and gave out that he was a smith's apprentice. He
arrived at a village, wherein lived a smith who was a stingy fellow,
who never did a kindness to any one, but wanted everything for
himself.  The youth went into the smithy and asked if he needed a
journeyman.  Yes, said the smith, and looked at him, and thought,
that is a strong fellow who will strike out well, and earn his bread.
So he asked, how much wages do you want.

I don't want any at all, he replied, only every fortnight, when the
other journeymen are paid, I will give you two blows, and you must
bear them.  The miser was heartily satisfied, and thought he would
thus save much money.  Next morning, the strange journeyman was to
begin to work, but when the master brought the glowing bar, and the
youth struck his first blow, the iron flew asunder, and the anvil
sank so deep into the earth, that there was no bringing it out again.
Then the miser grew angry, and said, oh, but I can't make any use of
you, you strike far too powerfully.  How much will you have for the
one blow.

Then said he, I will give you only quite a small blow, that's all.
And he raised his foot, and gave him such a kick that he flew away
over four loads of hay.  Then he sought out the thickest iron bar in
the smithy for himself, took it as a stick in his hand and went
onwards.

When he had walked for some time, he came to a small farm, and asked
the bailiff if he did not require a head-man.  Yes, said the bailiff,
I can make use of one.  You look a capable fellow who can do
something, how much a year do you want as wages.  He again replied
that he wanted no wages at all, but that every year he would give him
three blows, which he must bear.  Then the bailiff was satisfied, for
he, too, was a covetous fellow.  Next morning all the servants were
to go into the wood, and the others were already up, but the head-man
was still in bed.  Then one of them called to him, get up, it is
time, we are going into the wood, and you must go with us.  Ah, said
he quite roughly and surlily, you may just go, then, I shall be back
again before any of you.  Then the others went to the bailiff, and
told him that the head-man was still lying in bed, and would not go
into the wood with them.  The bailiff said they were to awaken him
again, and tell him to harness the horses.  The head-man, however,
said as before, just go there, I shall be back again before any of
you.  And then he stayed in bed two hours longer.  At length he arose
from the feathers, but first he got himself two bushels of peas from
the loft, made himself some broth, ate it at his leisure, and when
that was done, went and harnessed the horses, and drove into the
wood.

Not far from the wood was a ravine through which he had to pass, so
he first drove the horses on, and then stopped them, and went behind
the cart, took trees and brushwood, and made a great barricade, so
that no horse could get through.  When he was entering the wood, the
others were just driving out of it with their loaded carts to go
home.  Then said he to them, drive on, I will still get home before
you do.  He did not drive far into the wood, but at once tore two of
the very largest trees of all out of the earth, threw them on his
cart, and turned round.  When he came to the barricade, the others
were still standing there, not able to get through.  Don't you see,
said he, that if you had stayed with me, you would have got home just
as quickly, and would have had another hour's sleep.  He now wanted
to drive on, but his horeses could not work their way through, so he
unharnessed them, laid them on the top of the cart, took the shafts
in his own hands, and pulled it all through, and he did this just as
easily as if it had been laden with feathers. When he was over, he
said to the others, there, you see, I have got over quicker than you.
And drove on, and the others had to stay where they were.  In the
yard, however, he took a tree in his hand, showed it to the bailiff,
and said, isn't that a fine cord of wood.

Then said the bailiff to his wife, the servant is a good one - even
if he does sleep long, he is still home before the others.  So he
served the bailiff for a year, and when that was over, and the other
servants were getting their wages, he said it was time for him to
take his too.  The bailiff, however, was afraid of the blows which he
was to receive, and earnestly entreated him to excuse him from having
them, for rather than that, he himself would be head-man, and the
youth should be bailiff.  No said he, I will not be a bailiff, I am
head-man, and will remain so, but I will administer that which we
agreed on.  The bailiff was willing to give him whatsoever he
demanded, but it was of no use, the head-man said no to everything.

Then the bailiff did not know what to do, and begged for a
fortnight's delay, for he wanted to find some way of escape. The
head-man consented to this delay.  The bailiff summoned all his
clerks together, and they were to think the matter over, and give him
advice.  The clerks pondered for a long time, but at last they said
that no one was sure of his life with head-man, for he could kill a
man as easily as a midge, and that the bailiff ought to make him get
into the well and clean it, and when he was down below, they would
roll up one of the mill-stones which was lying there, and throw it on
his head, and then he would never return to daylight.

The advice pleased the bailiff, and the head-man was quite willing to
go down the well.  When he was standing down below at the bottom,
they rolled down the largest mill-stone and thought they had broken
his skull, but he cried, chase away those hens from the well, they
are scratching in the sand up there, and throwing the grains into my
eyes, so that I can't see.  So the bailiff cried, sh-sh, - and
pretended to frighten the hens away.  When the head-man had finished
his work, he climbed up and said, just look what a beautiful neck-tie
I have on.  And behold it was the mill-stone which he was wearing
round his neck.

The head-man now wanted to take his reward, but the bailiff again
begged for a fortnight's delay.  The clerks met together and advised
him to send the head-man to the haunted mill to grind corn by night,
for from thence as yet no man had ever returned in the morning alive.

The proposal pleased the bailiff, he called the head-man that very
evening, and ordered him to take eight bushels of corn to the mill,
and grind it that night, for it was wanted.  So the head-man went to
the loft, and put two bushels in his right pocket, and two in his
left, and took four in a wallet, half on his back, and half on his
breast, and thus laden went to the haunted mill.  The miller told him
that he could grind there very well by day, but not by night, for the
mill was haunted, and that up to the present time whosoever had gone
into it at night had been found in the morning lying dead inside.  He
said, I will manage it, just you go and put your head on the pillow.

Then he went into the mill, and poured out the corn.  About eleven
o'clock he went into the miller's room, and sat down on the bench.
When he had sat there a while, a door suddenly opened, and a large
table came in, and on the table, wine and roasted meats placed
themselves, and much good food besides, but everything came of
itself, for no one was there to carry it.

After this the chairs pushed themselves up, but no people came, until
all at once he beheld fingers, which handled knives and forks, and
laid food on the plates, but with this exception he saw nothing.  As
he was hungry, and saw the food, he, too, place himself at the table,
ate with those who were eating and enjoyed it.  When he had had
enough, and the others also had quite emptied their dishes, he
distinctly heard all the candles being suddenly snuffed out, and as
it was now pitch dark, he felt something like a box on the ear.  Then
he said, if anything of that kind comes again, I shall strike out in
return.  And when he had received a second box on the ear, he, too
struck out.

And so it continued the whole night.  He took nothing without
returning it, but repaid everything with interest, and did not slay
about him in vain.  At daybreak, however, everything ceased.  When
the miller had got up, he wanted to look after him, and wondered if
he were still alive.  Then the youth said, I have given some in
return.  The miller rejoiced, and said that the mill was now released
from the spell, and wanted to give him much money as a reward.  But
he said, money, I will not have, I have enough of it.  So he took his
meal on his back, went home, and told the bailiff that he had done
what he had been told to do, and would now have the reward agreed on.

When the bailiff heard that, he was seriously alarmed and quite
beside himself.  He walked to and fro in the room, and drops of sweat
ran down from his forehead.  Then he opened the window to get some
fresh air, but before he was aware, the head-man had given him such a
kick that he flew through the window out into the air, and so far
away that no one ever saw him again.

Then said the head-man to the bailiff's wife, if he does not come
back, you must take the other blow.  She cried, no, no I cannot bear
it.  And opened the other window, because drops of sweat were running
down her forehead.  Then he gave her such a kick that she, too, flew
out, and as she was lighter she went much higher than her husband.
Her husband cried, do come to me, but she replied, come you to me, I
cannot come to you.

And they hovered about there in the air, and could not get to each
other, and whether they are still hovering about or not, I do not
know, but the young giant took up his iron bar, and went on his way.
There was once upon a time a rich king who had three daughters, who
daily went to walk in the palace garden, and the king was a great
lover of all kinds of fine trees, but there was one for which he had
such an affection, that if anyone gathered an apple from it he wished
him a hundred fathoms underground.  And when harvest time came, the
apples on this tree were all as red as blood.  The three daughters
went every day beneath the tree, and looked to see if the wind had
not blown down an apple, but they never by any chance found one, and
the tree was so loaded with them that it was almost breaking, and the
branches hung down to the ground.

Then the king's youngest child had a great desire for an apple, and
said to her sisters, our father loves us far too much to wish us
underground, it is my belief that he would only do that to people who
were strangers.  And while she was speaking, the child plucked off
quite a large apple, and ran to her sisters, saying, just taste, my
dear little sisters, for never in my life have I tasted anything so
delightful.  Then the two other sisters also ate some of the apple,
whereupon all three sank deep down into the earth, where they could
hear no cock crow.

When mid-day came, the king wished to call them to come to dinner,
but they were nowhere to be found.  He sought them everywhere in the
palace and garden, but could not find them. Then he was much
troubled, and made known to the whole land that whosoever brought his
daughters back again should have one of them to wife. Hereupon so
many young men went about the country in search, that there was no
counting them, for everyone loved the three children because they
were so kind to all, and so fair of face.

Three young huntsmen also went out, and when they had traveled about
for eight days, they arrived at a great castle, in which were
beautiful apartments, and in one room a table was laid on which were
delicate dishes which were still so warm that they were smoking, but
in the whole of the castle no human being was either to be seen or
heard.  They waited there for half a day, and the food still remained
warm and smoking, and at length they were so hungry that they sat
down and ate, and agreed with each other that they would stay and
live in that castle, and that one of them, who should be chosen by
casting lots, should remain in the house, and the two others seek the
king's daughters.

They cast lots, and the lot fell on the eldest, so next day the two
younger went out to seek, and the eldest had to stay home.  At
mid-day came a small, small mannikin and begged for a piece of bread,
then the huntsman took the bread which he had found there, and cut a
round off the loaf and was about to give it to him, but while he was
giving it to the mannikin, the latter let it fall, and asked the
huntsman to be so good as to give him that piece again.  The huntsman
was about to do so and stooped, on which the mannikin took a stick,
seized him by the hair, and gave him a good beating.

Next day, the second stayed at home, and he fared no better. When the
two others returned in the evening, the eldest said, well, how have
you got on? Oh, very badly, said he, and then they lamented their
misfortune together, but they said nothing about it to the youngest,
for they did not like him at all, and always called him stupid Hans,
because he did not know the ways of the world.

On the third day, the youngest stayed at home, and again the little
mannikin came and begged for a piece of bread.  When the youth gave
it to him, the elf let it fall as before, and asked him to be so good
as to give him that piece again.  Then said Hans to the little
mannikin, what, can you not pick up that piece yourself?  If you will
not take as much trouble as that for your daily bread, you do not
deserve to have it.  Then the mannikin grew very angry and said he
was to do it, but the huntsman would not, and took my dear mannikin,
and gave him a thorough beating.  Then the mannikin screamed
terribly, and cried, stop, stop, and let me go, and I will tell you
where the king's daughters are. 

When Hans heard that, he left off beating him and the mannikin told
him that he was a gnome, and that there were more than a thousand
like him, and that if he would go with him he would show him where
the king's daughters were.  Then he showed him a deep well, but there
was no water in it.  And the elf said that he knew well that the
companions Hans had with him did not intend to deal honorably with
him, therefore if he wished to deliver the king's children, he must
do it alone.

The two other brothers would also be very glad to recover the king's
daughters, but they did not want to have any trouble or danger.  Hans
was therefore to take a large basket, and he must seat himself in it
with his hunting knife and a bell, and be let down.  Below are three
rooms, and in each of them was a princess, who was lousing a dragon
with many heads, which he must cut off.  And having said all this,
the elf vanished.

When it was evening the two brothers came and asked how he had got
on, and he said, pretty well so far, and that he had seen no one
except at mid-day when a little mannikin had come and begged for a
piece of bread, that he had given some to him, but that the mannikin
had let it fall and had asked him to pick it up again, but as he did
not choose to do that, the elf had begun to scold, and that he had
lost his temper, and had given the elf a beating, at which he had
told him where the king's daughters were. Then the two were so angry
at this that they grew green and yellow.

Next morning they went to the well together, and drew lots who should
first seat himself in the basket, and again the lot fell on the
eldest, and he was to seat himself in it, and take the bell with him.
Then he said, if I ring, you must draw me up again immediately.  When
he had gone down for a short distance, he rang, and they at once drew
him up again.  Then the second seated himself in the basket, but he
did just the same as the first, and then it was the turn of the
youngest, but he let himself be lowered quite to the bottom.

When he had got out of the basket, he took his knife, and went and
stood outside the first door and listened, and heard the dragon
snoring quite loudly.  He opened the door slowly, and one of the
princesses was sitting there, and had nine dragon's heads lying upon
her lap, and was lousing them.  Then he took his knife and hewed at
them, and the nine fell off.  The princess sprang up, threw her arms
round his neck, embraced and kissed him repeatedly, and took her
stomacher, which was made of pure gold, and hung it round his neck.

Then he went to the second princess, who had a dragon with five heads
to louse, and delivered her also, and to the youngest, who had a
dragon with four heads, he went likewise.  And they all rejoiced, and
embraced him and kissed him without stopping.  Then he rang very
loud, so that those above heard him, and he placed the princesses one
after the other in the basket, and had them all drawn up, but when it
came to his own turn he remembered the words of the elf, who had told
him that his comrades did not mean well by him.  So he took a great
stone which was lying there, and placed it in the basket, and when it
was about half way up, his false brothers above cut the rope, so that
the basket with the stone fell to the ground, and they thought that
he was dead, and ran away with the three princesses, making them
promise to tell their father that it was they who had delivered them.
Then they went to the king, and each demanded a princess in marriage.

In the meantime the youngest huntsman was wandering about the three
chambers in great trouble, fully expecting to have to end his days
there, when he saw, hanging on the wall, a flute, then said he, why
do you hang there.  No one can be merry here.

He looked at the dragons, heads likewise and said, you too cannot
help me now.  He walked to and fro for such a long time that he made
the surface of the ground quite smooth.  But at last other thoughts
came to his mind, and he took the flute from the wall, and played a
few notes on it, and suddenly a number of elves appeared, and with
every note that he sounded one more came.  Then he played until the
room was entirely filled.

They all asked what he desired, so he said he wished to get above
ground back to daylight, on which they seized him by every hair that
grew on his head, and thus they flew with him onto the earth again.
When he was above ground, he at once went to the king's palace, just
as the wedding of one princess was about to be celebrated, and he
went to the room where the king and his three daughters were.  When
the princesses saw him they fainted.

Hereupon the king was angry, and ordered him to be put in prison at
once, because he thought he must have done some injury to the
children.  When the princesses came to themselves, however, they
entreated the king to set him free again.

The king asked why, and they said that they were not allowed to tell
that, but their father said that they were to tell it to the stove.
And he went out, listened at the door, and heard everything.  Then he
caused the two brothers to be hanged on the gallows, and to the third
he gave his youngest daughter, and on that occasion I wore a pair of
glass shoes, and I struck them against a stone, and they said, klink,
and were broken.
There was a certain merchant who had two children, a boy and a girl,
they were both young, and could not walk.  And two richly-laden ships
of his sailed forth to sea with all his property on board, and just
as he was expecting to win much money by them, news came that they
had gone to the bottom, and now instead of being a rich man he was a
poor one, and had nothing left but one field outside the town.  In
order to drive his misfortune a little out of his thoughts, he went
out to this field, and as he was walking to and fro in it, a little
black mannikin stood suddenly by his side, and asked why he was so
sad, and what he was taking so much to heart.

Then said the merchant, if you could help me I would willingly tell
you.  Who knows, replied the black dwarf.  Perhaps, I can help you.
Then the merchant told him that all he possessed had gone to the
bottom of the sea, and that he had nothing left but this field.  Do
not trouble yourself, said the dwarf.  If you will promise to give me
the first thing that rubs itself against your leg when you are at
home again, and to bring it here to this place in twelve years, time,
you shall have as much money as you will. The merchant thought, what
can that be but my dog, and did not remember his little boy, so he
said yes, gave the black man a written and sealed promise, and went
home.

When he reached home, his little boy was so delighted that he held
himself by a bench, trotted up to him and seized him fast by the
legs.  The father was shocked, for he remembered his promise, and now
knew what he had pledged himself to do, as however, he still found no
money in his chest, he thought the dwarf had only been jesting.  A
month afterwards he went up to the garret, intending to gather
together some old tin and to sell it, and saw lying there a great
heap of money.  Then he was happy again, made purchases, became a
greater merchant than before, and felt that God was good to him.  In
the meantime the boy grew tall, and at the same time bright and
clever.  But the nearer the twelfth year approached the more anxious
grew the merchant, so that his distress might be seen in his face.
One day his son asked what ailed him, but the father would not say.
The boy, however, persisted so long, that at last he told him that
without being aware of what he was doing, he had promised him to a
black dwarf, and had received much money for doing so.  He said
likewise that he had set his hand and seal to this, and that now when
twelve years had gone by he would have to give him up.

Then said the son, oh, father, do not be uneasy, all will go well.
The black man has no power over me.  The son had himself blessed by
the priest, and when the time came, father and son went together to
the field, and the son made a circle and placed himself inside it
with his father.  Then came the black dwarf and said to the old man,
have you brought with you that which you have promised me.  He was
silent, but the son asked, what do you want here?  Then said the
black dwarf, I have to speak with your father, and not with you.  The
son replied, you have betrayed and misled my father, give back the
writing.  No, said the black dwarf, I will not give up my rights.
They spoke together for a long time after this, but at last they
agreed that the son, as he did not belong to the enemy of mankind,
nor yet to his father, should seat himself in a small boat, which
should lie on water which was flowing away from them, and that the
father should push it off with his own foot, and then the son should
remain given up to the water.  So he took leave of his father, placed
himself in a little boat, and the father had to push it off with his
own foot.  The boat capsized so that the keel was uppermost and the
deck under water, and the father believed his son was lost, and went
home and mourned for him.

The boat, however, did not sink, but floated quietly away, and the
boy sat safely inside it, and it floated thus for a long time, until
at last it ran into an unknown shore.  Then he landed and saw a
beautiful castle before him, and set out to go to it.  But when he
entered it, he found that it was bewitched.  He went through every
room, but all were empty until he reached the last, where a snake lay
coiled in a ring.  The snake, however, was an enchanted maiden, who
rejoiced to see him, and said, have you come, oh, my deliverer.  I
have already waited twelve years for you, this kingdom is bewitched,
and you must set it free.  How can I do that, he inquired.  To-night
come twelve black men, covered with chains who will ask what you are
doing here, but be silent, give them no answer, and let them do what
they will with you, they will torment you, beat you, stab you, let
everything pass, only do not speak, at twelve o'clock, they must go
away again.  On the second night twelve others will come, on the
third, four-and-twenty, who will cut off your head, but at twelve
o'clock their power will be over, and then if you have endured all,
and have not spoken the slightest word, I shall be released.  I will
come to you, and will have, in a bottle, some of the water of life.
I will rub you with that, and then you will come to life again, and
be as healthy as before.  Then said he, I will gladly set you free.
And everything happened just as she had said, the black men could not
force a single word from him, and on the third night the snake became
a beautiful princess, who came with the water of life and brought him
back to life again.

So she threw herself into his arms and kissed him, and there was joy
and gladness in the whole castle.  After this their marriage was
celebrated, and he was king of the golden mountain.

They lived very happily together, and the queen bore a fine boy.
Eight years had already gone by, when the king bethought him of his
father, his heart was moved, and he wished to visit him. The queen,
however, would not let him go away, and said, I know beforehand that
it will cause my unhappiness, but he suffered her to have no rest
until she consented.  At their parting she gave him a wishing-ring,
and said, take this ring and put it on your finger, and then you will
immediately be transported whithersoever you would be, only you must
promise me not to use it in wishing me away from this place and with
thy father.  That he promised her, put the ring on his finger, and
wished himself at home, just outside the town where his father lived.
Instantly he found himself there, and made for the town, but when he
came to the gate, the sentries would not let him in, because he wore
such strange and yet such rich and magnificent clothing.  Then he
went to a hill where a shepherd was watching his sheep, changed
clothes with him, put on his old shepherd's-coat, and then entered
the town without hindrance.

When he came to his father, he made himself known to him, but he did
not at all believe that the shepherd was his son, and said he
certainly had had a son, but that he was dead long ago, however, as
he saw he was a poor, needy shepherd, he would give him something to
eat.  Then the shepherd said to his parents, I am verily your son.
Do you know of no mark on my body by which you could recognize me.
Yes, said his mother, our son had a raspberry mark under his right
arm.  He slipped back his shirt, and they saw the raspberry under his
right arm, and no longer doubted that he was their son.  Then he told
them that he was king of the golden mountain, and a king's daughter
was his wife, and that they had a fine son of seven years old.

Then said the father, that is certainly not true, it is a fine kind
of a king who goes about in a ragged shepherd's-coat.  On this the
son fell in a passion, and without thinking of his promise, turned
his ring round, and wished both his wife and child with him.  They
were there in a second, but the queen wept, and reproached him, and
said that he had broken his word, and had brought misfortune upon
her.  He said, I have done it thoughtlessly, and not with evil
intention, and tried to calm her, and she pretended to believe this,
but she had mischief in her mind.

Then he led her out of the town into the field, and showed her the
stream where the little boat had been pushed off, and then he said, I
am tired, sit down, I will sleep awhile on your lap. And he laid his
head on her lap, and she picked his lice for a while until he fell
asleep.  When he was asleep, she first drew the ring from his finger,
then she drew away the foot which was under him, leaving only the
slipper behind her, and she took her child in her arms, and wished
herself back in her own kingdom.

When he awoke, there he lay quite deserted, and his wife and child
were gone, and so was the ring from his finger, the slipper only was
still there as a token.  Home to your parents you cannot return,
thought he, they would say that you were a wizard, you must be off,
and walk on until you arrive in your own kingdom.  So he went away
and came at length to a hill by which three giants were standing,
disputing with each other because they did not know how to divide
their father's property.

When they saw him passing by, they called to him and said little men
had quick wits, and that he was to divide their inheritance for them.
The inheritance, however, consisted of a sword, which, if anyone took
it in his hand, and said, all heads off but mine, every head would
lie on the ground, secondly, of a cloak which made any one who put it
on invisible, thirdly, of a pair of boots which could transport the
wearer to any place he wished in a moment.  He said, give me the
three things that I may see if they are still in good condition.

They gave him the cloak, and when he had put it on, he was invisible
and changed into a fly.  Then he resumed his own form and said, the
cloak is a good one, now give me the sword.  They said, no, we will
not give you that, if you were to say, all heads off but mine, all
our heads would be off, and you alone would be left with yours.
Nevertheless they gave it to him on the condition that he was only to
try it against a tree.  This he did, and the sword cut in two the
trunk of a tree as if it had been a blade of straw.  Then he wanted
to have the boots likewise, but they said, no, we will not give them,
if you had them on your feet and were to wish yourself at the top of
the hill, we should be left down here with nothing.  Oh, no, said he,
I will not do that.  So they gave him the boots as well.  And now
when he had got all these things, he thought of nothing but his wife
and his child, and said as though to himself, oh, if I were but on
the golden mountain, and at the same moment he vanished from the
sight of the giants, and thus their inheritance was divided.

When he was near his palace, he heard sounds of joy, and fiddles, and
flutes, and the people told him that his wife was celebrating her
wedding with another.  Then he fell into a rage, and said, false
woman, she betrayed and deserted me whilst I was asleep.  So he put
on his cloak, and unseen by all went into the palace.  When he
entered the dining-hall a great table was spread with delicious food,
and the guests were eating and drinking, and laughing, and jesting.
She sat on a royal seat in the midst of them in splendid apparel,
with a crown on her head.

He placed himself behind her, and no one saw him.  When she put a
piece of meat on a plate for herself, he took it away and ate it, and
when she poured out a glass of wine for herself, he took it away and
drank it.  She was always helping herself to something, and yet she
never got anything, for plate and glass disappeared immediately.
Then dismayed and ashamed, she arose and went to her chamber and
wept, but he followed her there.  She said, has the devil power over
me, or did my deliverer never come?  Then he struck her in the face,
and said, did your deliverer never come.  It is he who has you in his
power, you traitor.  Have I deserved this from you.

Then he made himself visible, went into the hall, and cried, the
wedding is at an end, the true king has returned.  The kings,
princes, and councillors who were assembled there, ridiculed and
mocked him, but he did not trouble to answer them, and said, will you
go away, or not.  On this they tried to seize him and pressed upon
him, but he drew his sword and said, all heads off but mine, and all
the heads rolled on the ground, and he alone was master, and once
more king of the golden mountain.
There was once upon a time a queen who had a little daughter who
was still so young that she had to be carried.  One day the
child was naughty, and the mother might say what she liked, but
the child would not be quiet.  Then she became impatient, and as
the ravens were flying about the palace, she opened the
window and said, I wish you were a raven and would fly away,
and then I should have some rest.  Scarcely had she spoken the
words, before the child was changed into a raven, and flew from
her arms out of the window.  It flew into a dark forest, and
stayed in it a long time, and the parents heard nothing of their
child.

Then one day a man was on his way through this forest
and heard the raven crying, and followed the voice, and when
he came nearer, the bird said, I am a king's daughter by birth,
and am bewitched, but you can set me free.  What am I to do, asked
he.  She said, go further into the forest, and you will find
a house, wherein sits an aged woman, who will offer you meat
and drink, but you must accept nothing, for if you eat and
drink anything, you will fall into a sleep, and then you will
not be able to set me free.  In the garden behind the house
there is a great heap of tan, and on this you shall stand
and wait for me.  For three days I will come every afternoon at
two o'clock in a carriage.  On the first day four white horses
will be harnessed to it, then four chestnut horses, and lastly
four black ones, but if you are not awake, but sleeping, I shall
not be set free.  The man promised to do everything that she
desired, but the raven said, alas, I know already that you will
not set me free, you will accept something from the woman.  Then
the man once more promised that he would certainly not touch
anything either to eat or to drink.

But when he entered the house the old woman came
to him and said, poor man, how faint you are, come and refresh
yourself, eat and drink.  No, said the man, I will not eat or
drink.  She, however, let him have no peace, and said, if
you will not eat, take one drink out of the glass, one is
nothing.  Then he let himself be persuaded, and drank.  Shortly
before two o'clock in the afternoon he went into the garden to the
tan heap to wait for the raven.  As he was standing there, his
weariness all at once became so great that he could not struggle
against it, and lay down for a short time, but he was determined
not to go to sleep.  Hardly, however, had he lain down, than
his eyes closed of their own accord, and he fell asleep and
slept so soundly that nothing in the world could have aroused him.

At two o'clock the raven came driving up with four white horses,
but she was already in deep grief and said, I know he is asleep.
And when she came into the garden, he was indeed lying there
asleep on the heap of tan.  She alighted from the carriage, went
to him, shook him, and called him, but he did not awake.  Next
day about noon, the old woman came again and brought him food and
drink, but he would not take any of it.  But she let him have no
rest and persuaded him until at length he again took one drink
out of the glass.  Towards two o'clock he went into the garden to
the tan heap to wait for the raven, but all at once felt such
a great weariness that his limbs would no longer support him.
He could not help himself, and was forced to lie down, and fell
into a heavy sleep.

When the raven drove up with four brown
horses, she was already full of grief, and said, I know he is
asleep.  She went to him, but there he lay sleeping, and there was
no wakening him.  Next day the old woman asked what was the meaning
of this.  He was neither eating nor drinking anything, did he want
to die.  He replied, I am not allowed to eat or drink, and will
not do so.  But she set a dish with food, and a glass with wine
before him, and when he smelt it he could not resist, and swallowed
a deep draught.  When the time came, he went out into the garden
to the heap of tan, and waited for the king's daughter,
but he became still more weary than on the day before, and lay down
and slept as
soundly as if he had been a stone.  At two o'clock the raven came
with four black horses, and the coachman and everything else was
black.  She was already in the deepest grief, and said, I know
that he is asleep and cannot set me free.

When she came to him,
there he was lying fast asleep.  She shook him and called him,
but she could not waken him.  Then she laid a loaf beside him,
and after that a piece of meat, and thirdly a bottle of wine, and
he might consume as much of all of them as he liked, but they would
never grow less.  After this she took a gold ring from her finger,
and put it on his, and her name was graven on it.  Lastly, she
laid a letter beside him wherein was written what she had given
him, and that none of the things would ever grow less, and in it
was also written, I see right well that here you will never be able
to set me free, but if you are still willing to do so, come to
the golden castle of Stromberg; it lies in your power, of that I
am certain.  And when she had given him all these things,
she seated herself in her carriage, and drove to the golden castle
of Stromberg.

When the man awoke and saw that he had slept, he was sad at heart,
and said, she has certainly driven by, and I have not set her free.
Then he perceived the things which were lying beside him,
and read the letter wherein was written how everything had
happened.  So he arose and went away, intending to go to the golden
castle of Stromberg, but he did not know where it was.  After he
had walked about the world for a long time, he entered into a dark
forest, and walked for fourteen days, and still could not find his
way out.  Then it was once more evening, and he was so tired that
he lay down in a thicket and fell asleep.  Next day he went
onwards, and in the evening, as he was again about to lie down
beneath some bushes, he heard such a howling and crying that he
could not go to sleep.  And at the time when people light the
candles, he saw one glimmering, and arose and went towards it.

Then he came to a house which seemed very small, for in front
of it a great giant was standing.  He thought to himself, if I go
in, and the giant sees me, it will very likely cost me my life.
At length he ventured it and went in.  When the giant saw him,
he said, it is well that you come, for it is long since I have
eaten, I will at once devour you for my supper.  I'd rather
you did not, said the man, I do not like to be eaten, but if
you have any desire to eat, I have quite enough here to satisfy
you.  If that be true, said the giant, you may be easy, I was only
going to devour you because I had nothing else.

Then they went,
and sat down to the table, and the man took out the bread, wine,
and meat which would never come to an end.  This pleases me
well, said the giant, and ate to his heart's content.  Then
the man said to him, can you tell me where the golden castle
of Stromberg is.  The giant said, I will look at my map,
all the towns, and villages, and houses are to be found on it.

He brought out the map which he had in the room and looked for the
castle, but it was not to be found on it.  It's no matter, said
he, I have some still larger maps in my cupboard upstairs,
and we will look at them.  But there, too, it was in vain.  The
man now wanted to set out again, but the giant begged him to
wait a few days longer until his brother, who had gone out to
bring some provisions, came home.  When the brother came home
they inquired about the golden castle of Stromberg.  He replied,
when I have eaten and have had enough, I will look at the map.

Then he went with them up to his chamber, and they searched
on his map, but could not find it.  Then he brought out still
older maps, and they never rested until they found the golden
castle of Stromberg, but it was many thousand miles away.  How
am I to get there, asked the man.  The giant said, I have two
hours, time, during which I will carry you into the neighborhood,
but after that I must be at home to suckle the child that we have.

So the giant carried the man to about a hundred leagues from
the castle, and said, you can very well walk the rest of the way
alone.  And he turned back, but the man went onwards day and
night, until at length he came to the golden castle of Stromberg.

It stood on a glass-mountain, and the bewitched maiden was
driving in her carriage round the castle, and then went inside
it.  He rejoiced when he saw her and wanted to climb up to her,
but when he began to do so he always slipped down the glass again.
And when he saw that he could not reach her, he was very worried,
and said to himself, I will stay down here below, and wait for
her.  So he built himself a hut and stayed in it for a whole year,
and every day saw the king's daughter driving about above, but
never could reach her.

Then one day he saw from his hut three robbers who were beating
each other, and cried to them, God be with you.  They stopped
when they heard the cry, but as they saw no one, they once more
began to beat each other, and that too most dangerously.  So he
again cried, God be with you.  Again they stopped, looked
round about, but as they saw no one they went on beating each
other.  Then he cried for the third time, God be with you, and
thought, I must see what these three are about, and went thither
and asked why they were beating each other so furiously.  One of
them said that he found a stick, and that when he struck a door
with it, that door would spring open.  The next said that he had
found a mantle, and that whenever he put it on, he was invisible,
but the third said he had found a horse on which a man could
ride everywhere even up the glass-mountain.  And now they did not know
whether they ought to have these things in common, or whether
they ought to divide them.

Then the man said, I will give you
something in exchange for these three things.  Money indeed
have I not, but I have other things of more value, but first I
must make an experiment to see if you have told the truth.  Then
they put him on the horse, threw the mantle round him, and gave
him the stick in his hand, and when he had all these things
they were no longer able to see him.  So he gave them some
vigorous blows and cried, now, vagabonds, you have got what you
deserve, are you satisfied.  And he rode up the glass-mountain,
but when he came in front of the castle at the top, it was shut.

Then he struck the door with his stick, and it sprang open
immediately.  He went in and ascended the stairs until he
came to the hall where the maiden was sitting with a golden
globlet of wine before her.  She, however, could not see him
because he had the mantle on.  And when he came up to her,
he drew from his finger the ring which she had given him, and
threw it into the goblet so that it rang.  Then she cried, that
is my ring, so the man who is to set me free must be here.

They searched the whole castle and did not find him, but he had gone
out, and had seated himself on the horse and thrown off the
mantle.  When they came to the door, they saw him and cried
aloud in their delight.  Then he alighted and took the king's
daughter in his arms, but she kissed him and said, now have you
set me free, and to-morrow we will celebrate our wedding.
There was once a poor peasant who had no land, but only a small
house, and one daughter.  Then said the daughter, we ought to ask our
lord the king for a bit of newly-cleared land.  When the king heard
of their poverty, he presented them with a piece of land, which she
and her father dug up, and intended to sow with a little corn and
grain of that kind.  When they had dug nearly the whole of the field,
they found in the earth a mortar made of pure gold.  Listen, said the
father to the girl, as our lord the king has been so gracious and
presented us with the field, we ought to give him this mortar in
return for it.  The daughter, however, would not consent to this, and
said, father, if we have the mortar without having the pestle as
well, we shall have to get the pestle, so you had much better say
nothing about it.  But he would not obey her, and took the mortar and
carried it to the king, said that he had found it in the cleared
land, and asked if he would accept it as a present.  The king took
the mortar, and asked if he had found nothing besides that.  No,
answered the countryman.

Then the king said that he must now bring him the pestle.  The
peasant said they had not found that, but he might just as well have
spoken to the wind, he was put in prison, and was to stay there until
he produced the pestle.  The servants had daily to carry him bread
and water, which is what people get in prison, and they heard how the
man cried out continually, ah, if I had but listened to my daughter.
Alas, alas, if I had but listened to my daughter, and would neither
eat nor drink.  So he commanded the servants to bring the prisoner
before him, and then the king asked the peasant why he was always
crying, ah, if I had but listened to my daughter, and what it was
that his daughter had said.  She told me that I ought not to take the
mortar to you, for I should have to produce the pestle as well.  If
you have a daughter who is as wise as that, let her come here.

She was therefore obliged to appear before the king, who asked her if
she really was so wise, and said he would set her a riddle, and if
she could guess that, he would marry her.  She at once said yes, she
would guess it.  Then said the king, come to me not clothed, not
naked, not riding, not walking, not in the road, and not off the
road, and if you can do that I will marry you.

So she went away, put off everything she had on, and then she was not
clothed, and took a great fishing net, and seated herself in it and
wrapped it entirely round and round her, so that she was not naked,
and she hired an ass, and tied the fisherman's net to its tail, so
that it was forced to drag her along, and that was neither riding nor
walking.  The ass had also to drag her in the ruts, so that she only
touched the ground with her big toe, and that was neither being in
the road nor off the road.  And when she arrived in that fashion, the
king said she had guessed the riddle and fulfilled all the
conditions.

Then he ordered her father to be released from the prison, took her
to wife, and gave into her care all the royal possessions. Now when
some years had passed, the king was once reviewing his troops on
parade, when it happened that some peasants who had been selling wood
stopped with their waggons before the palace, some of them had oxen
yoked to them, and some horses. There was one peasant who had three
horses, one of which was delivered of a young foal, and it ran away
and lay down between two oxen which were in front of the waggon.
When the peasants came together, they began to dispute, to beat each
other and make a disturbance, and the peasant with the oxen wanted to
keep the foal, and said one of the oxen had given birth to it, and
the other said his horse had had it, and that it was his.  The
quarrel came before the king, and he give the verdict that the foal
should stay where it had been found, and so the peasant with the
oxen, to whom it did not belong, got it.

Then the other went away, and wept and lamented over his foal.  Now
he had heard how gracious his lady the queen was because she herself
had sprung from poor peasant folks, so he went to her and begged her
to see if she could not help him to get his foal back again.  Said
she, yes, I will tell you what to do, if you will promise me not to
betray me.

Early to-morrow morning, when the king parades the guard, place
yourself there in the middle of the road by which he must pass, take
a great fishing-net and pretend to be fishing, go on fishing, and
empty out the net as if you had got it full, and then she told him
also what he was to say if he was questioned by the king.  The next
day, therefore, the peasant stood there, and fished on dry ground.
When the king passed by, and saw that, he sent his messenger to ask
what the stupid man was about.  He answered, I am fishing.  The
messenger asked how he could fish when there was no water there.  The
peasant said, it is as easy for me to fish on dry land as it is for
an ox to have a foal.

The messenger went back and took the answer to the king, who ordered
the peasant to be brought to him and told him that this was not his
own idea, and he wanted to know whose it was.  The peasant, said the
king, must confess this at once.  The peasant, however, would not do
so, and said always, God forbid he should, the idea was his own.  So
they laid him on a heap of straw, and beat him and tormented him so
long that at last he admitted that he had got the idea from the
queen.

When the king reached home again, he said to his wife, why have you
behaved so falsely to me.  I will not have you any longer for a wife,
your time is up, go back to the place from whence you came - to your
peasant's hut.  One favor, however, he granted her, she might take
with her the one thing that was dearest and best in her eyes, and
thus was she dismissed.

She said, yes, my dear husband, if you command this, I will do it,
and she embraced him and kissed him, and said she would take leave of
him.  Then she ordered a powerful sleeping draught to be brought, to
drink farewell to him, the king took a long draught, but she took
only a little.  He soon fell into a deep sleep, and when she
perceived that, she called a servant and took a fair white linen
cloth and wrapped the king in it, and the servant was forced to carry
him into a carriage that stood before the door, and she drove with
him to her own little house.

She laid him in her own little bed, and he slept one day and one
night without awakening, and when he awoke he looked round and said,
good God, where am I.  He called his attendants, but none of them
were there.  At length his wife came to his bedside and said, my dear
lord and king, you told me I might bring away with me from the palace
that which was dearest and most precious in my eyes - I have nothing
more precious and dear than yourself, so I have brought you with me.

Tears rose to the king's eyes and he said, dear wife, you shall be
mine and I will be yours, and he took her back with him to the royal
palace and was married again to her, and at the present time they are
very likely still living.
About a thousand or more years ago, there were in this
country nothing but small kings, and one of them who lived
on the Keuterberg was very fond of hunting.  Once on a time
when he was riding forth from his castle with his huntsmen,
three girls were watching their cows upon the mountain, and
when they saw the king with all his followers, the eldest girl
pointed to him, and called to the two other girls, hullo.  Hullo.
If I do not get that one, I will have none.  Then the second
girl answered from the other side of the hill, and pointed to
the one who was on the king's right hand, hullo.  Hullo.  If
I do not get him, I will have no one.  These, however, were the
two ministers.  The king heard all this, and when he had come
back from the chase, he caused the three girls to be brought
to him, and asked them what they had said yesterday on the
mountain.  This they would not tell him, so the king asked
the eldest if she really would take him for her husband.  Then
she said, yes, and the two ministers married the two sisters,
for they were all three fair and beautiful of face, especially
the queen, who had hair like flax.

But the two sisters had no children, and once when the king was
obliged to go from home he invited them to come to the queen
in order to cheer her, for she was about to bear a child.  She
had a little boy who brought a bright red star into the world
with him.  Then the two sisters said to each other that they
would throw the beautiful boy into the water.  When they had
thrown him in - I believe it was into the Weser - a little
bird flew up into the air, which sang -
          to thy death art thou sped
          until God's word be said.
          In the white lily bloom,
          brave boy, is thy tomb.

When the two heard that, they were frightened to death, and
ran away in great haste.  When the king came home they told him
that the queen had been delivered of a dog.  Then the king
said, what God does, is well done.  But a fisherman who
dwelt near the water fished the little boy out again while
he was still alive, and as his wife had no children, they reared
him.

When a year had gone by, the king again went away, and
the queen had another little boy, whom the false sisters
likewise took and threw into the water.  Then up flew a little
bird again and sang -
          to thy death art thou sped
          until God's word be said.
          In the white lily bloom,
          brave boy, is thy tomb.

And when the king came back, they told him that the queen
had once more given birth to a dog, and he again said,
what God does, is well done.  The fisherman, however, fished
this one also out of the water, and reared him.

Then the king again journeyed forth, and the queen had a
little girl, whom also the false sisters threw into the
water.  Then again a little bird flew up on high and sang -
          to thy death art thou sped
          until God's word be said.
          In the white lily bloom,
          bonny girl, is thy tomb.

And when the king came home they told him that the queen had
been delivered of a cat.  Then the king grew angry, and ordered
his wife to be cast into prison, and therein was she shut up
for many long years.

When the children had grown up, the eldest once went out with
some other boys to fish, but the other boys would not have
him with them, and said, go your way, foundling.

Hereupon he was much troubled, and asked the old fisherman if
that was true.  The fisherman told him that once when he was
fishing he had drawn him out of the water.  So the boy said he
would go forth and seek his father.  The fisherman, however,
entreated him to stay, but he would not let himself be hindered,
and at last the fisherman consented.  Then the boy went on his
way and walked for many days, and at last he came to a great
stretch of water by the side of which stood an old woman fishing.

"Good day, mother," said the boy.

"Many thanks," said she.

"You will fish long enough before you catch anything."

"And you will seek long enough before you find your father.  How
will you get over the water," said the woman.

"God knows."

Then the old woman took him up on her back and carried him
through it, and he sought for a long time, but could not
find his father.

When a year had gone by, the second boy set out to seek his
brother.  He came to the water, and all fared with him just
as with his brother.  And now there was no one at home but the
daughter, and she mourned for her brothers so much that at last
she also begged the fisherman to let her set forth, for she
wished to go in search of her brothers.  Then she likewise came
to the great stretch of water, and she said to the old woman,
"Good day, mother."

"Many thanks," replied the old woman.

"May God help you with your fishing," said the maiden.  When
the old woman heard that, she became quite friendly, and carried
her over the water, gave her a wand, and said to her, "Go, my
daughter, ever onwards by this road, and when you come to a
great black dog, you must pass it silently and boldly, without
either laughing or looking at it.  Then you will come to a great
high castle, on the threshold of which you must let the wand fall,
and go straight through the castle, and out again on the other
side.  There you will see an old fountain out of which a large
tree has grown, whereon hangs a bird in a cage which you must
take down.  Take likewise a glass of water out of the fountain,
and with these two things go back by the same way.  Pick up
the wand again from the threshold and take it with you, and
when you again pass by the dog, strike him in the face with it,
but be sure that you hit him, and then just come back here to me."

The maiden found everything exactly as the old woman had said, and
on her way back she found her two brothers who had sought each
other over half the world.  They went together to the place
where the black dog was lying on the road, she struck it in
the face, and it turned into a handsome prince who went with
them to the river.  There the old woman was still standing.  She
rejoiced much to see them again, and carried them all over the
water, and then she too went away, for now she was freed.  The
others, however, went to the old fisherman, and all were glad that
they had found each other again, but they hung the bird on the
wall.

But the second son could not settle at home, and took his
crossbow and went a-hunting.  When he was tired he took his
flute, and made music.  The king was hunting too, and heard that
and went thither, and when he met the youth, he said, "Who has given
you leave to hunt here?"

"Oh, no one."

"To whom do you belong, then?"

"I am the fisherman's son."

"But he has no children."

"If you will not believe, come with me."

That the king did, and questioned the fisherman, who told
him everything, and the little bird on the wall began to
sing -
          the mother sits alone
          there in the prison small,
          o king of royal blood,
          these are thy children all.
          The sisters twain so false,
          they wrought the children woe,
          there in the waters deep
          where the fishermen come and go.

Then they were all terrified, and the king took the bird, the
fisherman and the three children back with him to the castle,
and ordered the prison to be opened and brought his wife
out again.  She had grown quite ill and weak, so the daughter
gave her some of the water of the fountain to drink, and she
became strong and healthy.  But the two false sisters were
burnt, and the daughter married the prince.
There was once a king who had an illness, and no one believed that he
would come out of it with his life.  He had three sons who were much
distressed about it, and went down into the palace-garden and wept.
There they met an old man who inquired as to the cause of their
grief.  They told him that their father was so ill that he would most
certainly die, for nothing seemed to cure him.  Then the old man
said, "I know of one more remedy, and that is the water of life.  If
he drinks of it he will become well again, but it is hard to find."
The eldest said, "I will manage to find it." And went to the sick
king, and begged to be allowed to go forth in search of the water of
life, for that alone could save him.  "No," said the king, "the
danger of it is too great.  I would rather die."

But he begged so long that the king consented.  The prince thought in
his heart, "If I bring the water, then I shall be best beloved of my
father, and shall inherit the kingdom." So he set out, and when he
had ridden forth a little distance, a dwarf stood there in the road
who called to him and said, "Whither away so fast?" "Silly shrimp,"
said the prince, very haughtily, "it is nothing to do with you." And
rode on.  But the little dwarf had grown angry, and had wished an
evil wish.  Soon after this the prince entered a ravine, and the
further he rode the closer the mountains drew together, and at last
the road became so narrow that he could not advance a step further.
It was impossible either to turn his horse or to dismount from the
saddle, and he was shut in there as if in prison.  The sick king
waited long for him, but he came not.

Then the second son said, "father, let me go forth to seek the
water." And thought to himself, "If my brother is dead, then the
kingdom will fall to me." At first the king would not allow him to go
either, but at last he yielded, so the prince set out on the same
road that his brother had taken, and he too met the dwarf, who
stopped him to ask whither he was going in such haste.  "Little
shrimp," said the prince, "that is nothing to do with you." And rode
on without giving him another look.  But the dwarf bewitched him, and
he, like the other, rode into a ravine, and could neither go forwards
nor backwards.  So fare haughty people.

As the second son also remained away, the youngest begged to be
allowed to go forth to fetch the water, and at last the king was
obliged to let him go.  When he met the dwarf and the latter asked
him whither he was going in such haste, he stopped, gave him an
explanation, and said, "I am seeking the water of life, for my father
is sick unto death."

"Do you know, then, where that is to be found?"

"No," said the prince.

"As you have borne yourself as is seemly, and not haughtily like your
false brothers, I will give you the information and tell you how you
may obtain the water of life.  It springs from a fountain in the
courtyard of an enchanted castle, but you will not be able to make
your way to it, if I do not give you an iron wand and two small
loaves of bread.  Strike thrice with the wand on the iron door of the
castle and it will spring open, inside lie two lions with gaping
jaws, but if you throw a loaf to each of them, they will be quieted.
Then hasten to fetch some of the water of life before the clock
strikes twelve else the door will shut again, and you will be
imprisoned."

The prince thanked him, took the wand and the bread, and set out on
his way.  When he arrived, everything was as the dwarf had said.  The
door sprang open at the third stroke of the wand, and when he had
appeased the lions with the bread, he entered the castle, and came to
a large and splendid hall, wherein sat some enchanted princes whose
rings he drew off their fingers.  A sword and a loaf of bread were
lying there, which he carried away.  After this, he entered a
chamber, in which was a beautiful maiden who rejoiced when she saw
him, kissed him, and told him that he had set her free, and should
have the whole of her kingdom, and that if he would return in a year
their wedding should be celebrated.  Likewise she told him where the
spring of the water of life was, and that he was to hasten and draw
some of it before the clock struck twelve.  Then he went onwards, and
at last entered a room where there was a beautiful newly-made bed,
and as he was very weary, he felt inclined to rest a little.  So he
lay down and fell asleep.

When he awoke, it was striking a quarter to twelve.  He sprang up in
a fright, ran to the spring, drew some water in a cup which stood
near, and hastened away.  But just as he was passing through the iron
door, the clock struck twelve, and the door fell to with such
violence that it carried away a piece of his heel.

He, however, rejoicing at having obtained the water of life, went
homewards, and again passed the dwarf.  When the latter saw the sword
and the loaf, he said, "With these you have won great wealth, with
the sword you can slay whole armies, and the bread will never come to
an end." But the prince would not go home to his father without his
brothers, and said, "Dear dwarf, can you not tell me where my two
brothers are?  They went out before I did in search of the water of
life, and have not returned."

"They are imprisoned between two mountains," said the dwarf. "I have
condemned them to stay there, because they were so haughty." Then the
prince begged until the dwarf released them, but he warned him and
said, "Beware of them, for they have bad hearts." When his brothers
came, he rejoiced, and told them how things had gone with him, that
he had found the water of life and had brought a cupful away with
him, and had rescued a beautiful princess, who was willing to wait a
year for him, and then their wedding was to be celebrated and he
would obtain a great kingdom.

After that they rode on together, and chanced upon a land where war
and famine reigned, and the king already thought he must perish, for
the scarcity was so great.  Then the prince went to him and gave him
the loaf, wherewith he fed and satisfied the whole of his kingdom,
and then the prince gave him the sword also wherewith he slew the
hosts of his enemies, and could now live in rest and peace.  The
prince then took back his loaf and his sword, and the three brothers
rode on.  But after this they entered two more countries where war
and famine reigned and each time the prince gave his loaf and his
sword to the kings, and had now delivered three kingdoms, and after
that they went on board a ship and sailed over the sea.  During the
passage, the two eldest conversed apart and said, "The youngest has
found the water of life and not we, for that our father will give him
the kingdom - the kingdom which belongs to us, and he will rob us of
all our fortune." They then began to seek revenge, and plotted with
each other to destroy him.  They waited until they found him fast
asleep, then they poured the water of life out of the cup, and took
it for themselves, but into the cup they poured salt sea-water.

Now therefore, when they arrived home, the youngest took his cup to
the sick king in order that he might drink out of it, and be cured.
But scarcely had he drunk a very little of the salt sea-water than he
became still worse than before.  And as he was lamenting over this,
the two eldest brothers came, and accused the youngest of having
intended to poison him, and said that they had brought him the true
water of life, and handed it to him.  He had scarcely tasted it, when
he felt his sickness departing, and became strong and healthy as in
the days of his youth.

After that they both went to the youngest, mocked him, and said, "You
certainly found the water of life, but you have had the pain, and we
the gain, you should have been cleverer, and should have kept your
eyes open.  We took it from you whilst you were asleep at sea, and
when a year is over, one of us will go and fetch the beautiful
princess. But beware that you do not disclose aught of this to our
father, indeed he does not trust you, and if you say a single word,
you shall lose your life into the bargain, but if you keep silent,
you shall have it as a gift."

The old king was angry with his youngest son, and thought he had
plotted against his life.  So he summoned the court together and had
sentence pronounced upon his son, that he should be secretly shot.
And once when the prince was riding forth to the chase, suspecting no
evil, the king's huntsman was told to go with him, and when they were
quite alone in the forest, the huntsman looked so sorrowful that the
prince said to him, "Dear huntsman, what ails you?" The huntsman
said, "I cannot tell you, and yet I ought." Then the prince said,
"Say openly what it is, I will pardon you." "Alas," said the
huntsman, "I am to shoot you dead, the king has ordered me to do it."
Then the prince was shocked, and said, "Dear huntsman, let me live,
there, I give you my royal garments, give me your common ones in
their stead." The huntsman said, "I will willingly do that, indeed I
would not have been able to shoot you." Then they exchanged clothes,
and the huntsman returned home, while the prince went further into
the forest.

After a time three waggons of gold and precious stones came to the
king for his youngest son, which were sent by the three kings who had
slain their enemies with the prince's sword, and maintained their
people with his bread, and who wished to show their gratitude for it.
The old king then thought, "Can my son have been innocent?" And said
to his people, "Would that he were still alive, how it grieves me
that I have suffered him to be killed." "He still lives," said the
huntsman, "I could not find it in my heart to carry out your
command." And told the king how it had happened.  Then a stone fell
from the king's heart, and he had it proclaimed in every country that
his son might return and be taken into favor again.

The princess, however, had a road made up to her palace which was
quite bright and golden, and told her people that whosoever came
riding straight along it to her, would be the right one and was to be
admitted, and whoever rode by the side of it, was not the right one
and was not to be admitted.

As the time was now close at hand, the eldest thought he would hasten
to go to the king's daughter, and give himself out as her rescuer,
and thus win her for his bride, and the kingdom to boot.  Therefore
he rode forth, and when he arrived in front of the palace, and saw
the splendid golden road, he thought, it would be a sin and a shame
if I were to ride over that.  And turned aside, and rode on the right
side of it. But when he came to the door, the servants told him that
he was not the right one, and was to go away again.

Soon after this the second prince set out, and when he came to the
golden road, and his horse had put one foot on it, he thought, it
would be a sin and a shame, a piece might be trodden off.  And he
turned aside and rode on the left side of it, and when he reached the
door, the attendants told him he was not the right one, and he was to
go away again.

When at last the year had entirely expired, the third son likewise
wished to ride out of the forest to his beloved, and with her forget
his sorrows.  So he set out and thought of her so incessantly, and
wished to be with her so much, that he never noticed the golden road
at all.  So his horse rode onwards up the middle of it, and when he
came to the door, it was opened and the princess received him with
joy, and said he was her saviour, and lord of the kingdom, and their
wedding was celebrated with great rejoicing.  When it was over she
told him that his father invited him to come to him, and had forgiven
him.

So he rode thither, and told him everything, how his brothers had
betrayed him, and how he had nevertheless kept silence.  The old king
wished to punish them, but they had put to sea, and never came back
as long as they lived.
There was once a poor woodcutter who toiled from early
morning till late at night.  When at last he had laid by some
money he said to his boy, "You are my only child, I will spend the
money which I have earned with the sweat of my brow on your
education, if you learn some honest trade you can support me in
my old age, when my limbs have grown stiff and I am obliged to
stay at home."

Then the boy went to a high school and learned
diligently so that his masters praised him, and he remained
there a long time.  When he had worked through two classes, but
was still not yet perfect in everything, the little pittance
which the father had earned was all spent, and the boy was
obliged to return home to him.

"Ah," said the father, sorrowfully, "I can
give you no more, and in these hard times I cannot earn a
farthing more than will suffice for our daily bread."  "Dear
father," answered the son, "don't trouble yourself about it, if it
is God's will, it will turn to my advantage.  I shall soon
accustom myself to it."  When the father wanted to go into the
forest to earn money by helping to chop and stack wood, the
son said, "I will go with you and help you."  "Nay, my son," said
the father, "that would be hard for you.  You are not accustomed
to rough work, and will not be able to bear it.  Besides, I have
only one axe and no money left wherewith to buy another."  "Just
go to the neighbor," answered the son, "he will lend you his axe
until I have earned one for myself."

The father then borrowed an axe of the neighbor, and next
morning at break of day they went out into the forest together.
The son helped his father and was quite merry and brisk about
it.  But when the sun was right over their heads, the father
said, "We will rest, and have our dinner, and then we shall work
twice as well."  The son took his bread in his hands, and said,
"Just you rest, father, I am not tired, I will walk up and down
a little in the forest, and look for birds' nests."  "Oh, you fool,"
said the father, "why should you want to run about there?  Afterwards
you will be tired, and no longer able to raise your arm.
Stay here, and sit down beside me."

The son, however, went into the forest, ate his bread, was very
merry and peered in among the green branches to see if he could
discover a bird's nest anywhere.  So he walked to and fro until
at last he came to a great dangerous-looking oak, which
certainly was already many hundred years old, and which five
men could not have spanned.  He stood still and looked at it, and
thought, many a bird must have built its nest in that.  Then all at
once it seemed to him that he heard a voice.  He listened and
became aware that someone was crying in a very smothered voice,
"Let me out, let me out."  He looked around, but could discover
nothing.  Then he fancied that the voice came out of the ground.
So he cried, "Where are you?"  The voice answered, "I am down here
amongst the roots of the oak-tree.  Let me out.  Let me out."

The schoolboy began to loosen the earth under the tree, and search
among the roots, until at last he found a glass bottle in a little
hollow.  He lifted it up and held it against the light, and then
saw a creature shaped like a frog, springing up and down in it.
"Let me out.  Let me out," it cried anew, and the boy thinking no
evil, drew the cork out of the bottle.  Immediately a spirit
ascended from it, and began to grow, and grew so fast that in a
very few moments he stood before the boy, a terrible fellow as big
as half the tree.  "Do you know," he cried in an awful voice, "what
your reward is for having let me out?"  "No," replied the boy
fearlessly, "how should I know that?"  "Then I will tell you," cried
the spirit, "I must strangle you for it."  "You should have told me
that sooner," said the boy, "for I should then have left you shut
up, but my head shall stand fast for all you can do, more persons
than one must be consulted about that."  "More persons here, more
persons there," said the spirit.  "You shall have the reward you
have earned.  Do you think that I was shut up there for such a
long time as a favor.  No, it was a punishment for me.  I am the
mighty Mercurius.  Whoso releases me, him must I strangle."
"Slowly," answered the boy, "not so fast.  I must first know that
you really were shut up in that little bottle, and that you are
the right spirit.  If, indeed, you can get in again, I will believe
and then you may do as you will with me."  The spirit said
haughtily, "that is a very trifling feat."  Drew himself together,
and made himself as small and slender as he had been at first, so
that he crept through the same opening, and right through the neck
of the bottle in again.  Scarcely was he within than the boy
thrust the cork he had drawn back into the bottle, and threw
it among the roots of the oak into its old place, and the spirit
was deceived.

And now the schoolboy was about to return to his father, but the
spirit cried very piteously, "Ah, do let me out, ah, do let me out."
"No," answered the boy, "not a second time.  He who has once tried to
take my life shall not be set free by me, now that I have caught
him again."  "If you will set me free," said the spirit, "I will give
you so much that you will have plenty all the days of your life."
"No," answered the boy, "you would cheat me as you did the first time."
"You are spurning you own good luck," said the spirit, "I will do you
no harm but will reward you richly."  The boy thought, "I will
venture it, perhaps he will keep his word, and anyhow he shall not
get the better of me."

Then he took out the cork, and the spirit
rose up from the bottle as he had done before, stretched himself
out and became as big as a giant.  "Now you shall have your reward,"
said he, and handed the boy a little rag just like stiking-plaster,
and said, "If you spread one end of this over a wound it
will heal, and if you rub steel or iron with the other end it will
be changed into silver."  "I must just try that," said the boy, and
went to a tree, tore off the bark with his axe, and rubbed it
with one end of the plaster.  It immediately closed together and
was healed.  "Now, it is all right," he said to the spirit, "and we
can part."  The spirit thanked him for his release, and the boy
thanked the spirit for his present, and went back to his father.

"Where have you been racing about?" said the father.  "Why have you
forgotten your work?  I always said that you would never come to
anything."  "Be easy, father, I will make it up."  "Make it up indeed,"
said the father angrily, "that's no use."  "Take care, father, I will
soon hew that tree there, so that it will split."  Then he took
his plaster, rubbed the axe with it, and dealt a mighty blow, but
as the iron had changed into silver, the edge bent.  "Hi, father,
just look what a bad axe you've given me, it has become quite
crooked."  The father was shocked and said, "Ah, what have you done!
Now I shall have to pay for that, and have not the wherewithal, and
that is all the good I have got by your
work."  "Don't get angry," said the son, "I will soon pay for the axe."
"Oh, you blockhead," cried the father, "Wherewith will you pay for it?
You have nothing but what I give you.  These are students' tricks
that are sticking in your head, you have no idea of woodcutting."

After a while the boy said, "Father, I can really work no more, we
had better take a holiday."  "Eh, what," answered he, "do you think I
will sit with my hands lying in my lap like you.  I must go on
working, but you may take yourself off home."  "Father, I am here in
this wood for the first time, I don't know my way alone.  Do go
with me."  As his anger had now abated, the father at last let
himself be persuaded and went home with him. Then he said to the
son, "Go and sell your damaged axe, and see what you can get for it,
and I must earn the difference, in order to pay the neighbor."

The son took the axe, and carried it into town to a goldsmith,
who tested it, laid it in the scales, and said, "It is worth four
hundred talers, I have not so much as that by me."  The son said,
"Give me what thou have, I will lend you the rest."  The goldsmith
gave him three hundred talers, and remained a hundred in his
debt.  The son thereupon went home and said, "Father, I have got
the money, go and ask the neighbor what he wants for the axe."
"I know that already," answered the old man, "one taler, six groschen."
"Then give him him two talers, twelve groschen, that is double and
enough.  See, I have money in plenty."  And he gave the father
a hundred talers, and said, "You shall never know want, live as
comfortably as you like."

"Good heavens," said the father, "how
have you come by these riches?"  The boy then told how all had come
to pass, and how he, trusting in his luck, had made such a packet.
But with the money that was left, he went back to the high school
and went on learning more, and as he could heal all wounds with
his plaster, he became the most famous doctor in the whole world.
A discharged soldier had nothing to live on, and did not know how to
make his way.  So he went out into the forest and when he had walked
for a short time, he met a little man who turned out to be the devil.
The little man said to him, "What ails you, you seem so very
sorrowful?" Then the soldier said, "I am hungry, but have no money."
The devil said, "If you will hire yourself to me, and be my
serving-man, you shall have enough for all your life.  You shall
serve me for seven years, and after that you shall again be free. But
one thing I must tell you, and that is, you must not wash, comb, or
trim yourself, or cut your hair or nails, or wipe the water from your
eyes." The soldier said, "All right, if there is no help for it," and
went off with the little man, who straightway led him down into hell.
Then he told him what he had to do.  He was to poke the fire under
the kettles wherein the hell-broth was stewing, keep the house clean,
drive all the sweepings behind the doors, and see that everything was
in order, but if he once peeped into the kettles, it would go ill
with him.  The soldier said, "Good, I will take care." And then the
old devil went out again on his wanderings, and the soldier entered
upon his new duties, made the fire, and swept the dirt well behind
the doors, just as he had been bidden.

When the old devil came back again, he looked to see if all had been
done, appeared satisfied, and went forth a second time.  The soldier
now took a good look on every side, the kettles were standing all
round hell with a mighty fire below them, and inside they were
boiling and sputtering.  He would have given anything to look inside
them, if the devil had not so particularly forbidden him.

At last he could no longer restrain himself, slightly raised the lid
of the first kettle, and peeped in, and there he saw his former
corporal sitting. "Aha, old bird," said he, "do I meet you here?  You
once had me in your power, now I have you." And he quickly let the
lid fall, poked the fire, and added a fresh log.  After that, he went
to the second kettle, raised its lid also a little, and peeped in and
there sat his former ensign.  "Aha, old bird, so I find you here, you
once had me in your power, now I have you." He closed the lid again,
and fetched yet another log to make it really hot.  Then he wanted to
see who might be sitting up in the third kettle - and who should it
be but his general.  "Aha, old bird, do I meet you here.  Once you
had me in your power, now I have you." And he fetched the bellows and
made hell-fire blaze right under him.

So he did his work seven years in hell, did not wash, comb, or trim
himself, or cut his hair or nails, or wash the water out of his eyes,
and the seven years seemed so short to him that he thought he had
only been half a year.  Now when the time had fully gone by, the
devil came and said, "Well Hans, what have you done?" "I poked the
fire under the kettles, and I have swept all the dirt well behind the
doors."

"But you have peeped into the kettles as well, it is lucky for you
that you added fresh logs to them, or else your life would have been
forfeited.  Now that your time is up, will you go home again?" "Yes,"
said the soldier, "I should very much like to see what my father is
doing at home." The devil said, "In order that you may receive the
wages you have earned, go and fill your knapsack full of the
sweepings, and take it home with you.  You must also go unwashed and
uncombed, with long hair on your head and beard, and with uncut nails
and dim eyes, and when you are asked whence you come, you must say,
from hell, and when you are asked who you are, you are to say, the
devil's sooty brother, and my king as well."

The soldier held his peace, and did as the devil bade him, but he was
not at all satisfied with his wages. Then as soon as he was up in the
forest again, he took his knapsack from his back, to empty it, but on
opening it, the sweepings had become pure gold.  "I should never have
expected that," said he, and was well pleased, and entered the town.
The landlord was standing in front of the inn, and when he saw the
soldier approaching, he was terrified, because Hans looked such a
horrible sight, worse than a scare-crow.  He called to him and asked,
"Whence do you come?" "From hell." "Who are you?" "The devil's sooty
brother, and my king as well." Then the host would not let him enter,
but when Hans showed him the gold, he came and unlatched the door
himself.  Hans then ordered the best room and attendance, ate, and
drank his fill, but neither washed nor combed himself as the devil
had bidden him, and at last lay down to sleep.  But the knapsack full
of gold remained before the eyes of the landlord, and left him no
peace, and during the night he crept in and stole it away.  Next
morning, however, when Hans got up and wanted to pay the landlord and
travel further, behold his knapsack was gone.  But he soon composed
himself and thought, you have been unfortunate from no fault of your
own.  And straightway went back again to hell, complained of his
misfortune to the old devil, and begged for his help.  The devil
said, "Seat yourself, I will wash, comb, and trim you, cut your hair
and nails, and wash your eyes for you." And when he had done with
him, he gave him the knapsack back again full of sweepings, and said,
"Go and tell the landlord that he must return you your money, or else
I will come and fetch him, and he shall poke the fire in your place."
Hans went up and said to the landlord, "You have stolen my money, if
you do not return it, you shall go down to hell in my place, and will
look as horrible as I." Then the landlord gave him the money, and
more besides, only begging him to keep it secret.  And Hans was now a
rich man.

He set out on his way home to his father, bought himself a shabby
smock to wear, and strolled about making music, for he had learned to
do that while he was with the devil in hell.

There was however, an old king in that country, before whom he had to
play, and the king was so delighted with his playing, that he
promised him his eldest daughter in marriage.  But when she heard
that she was to be married to a common fellow in a smock, she said,
"Rather than do that, I would go into the deepest water." Then the
king gave him the youngest, who was quite willing to do it to please
her father, and thus the devil's sooty brother got the king's
daughter, and when the aged king died, the whole kingdom likewise.

There was once a young fellow who enlisted as a soldier, conducted
himself bravely, and was always the foremost when it rained bullets.
So long as the war lasted, all went well, but when peace was made, he
received his dismissal, and the captain said he might go where he
liked.  His parents were dead, and he had no longer a home, so he
went to his brothers and begged them to take him in, and keep him
until war broke out again.  The brothers, however, were hard-hearted
and said, "What can we do with you?  You are of no use to us, go and
make a living for yourself." The soldier had nothing left but his
gun, so he took that on his shoulder, and went forth into the world.

He came to a wide heath, on which nothing was to be seen but a circle
of trees, under these he sat sorrowfully down, and began to think
over his fate.  I have no money, thought he, I have learnt no trade
but that of fighting, and now that they have made peace they don't
want me any longer, so I see before hand that I shall have to starve.
All at once he heard a rustling and when he looked round, a strange
man stood before him, who wore a green coat and looked right stately,
but had a hideous cloven foot.  "I know already what you are in need
of," said the man, "gold and possessions shall you have, as much as
you can make away with, do what you will, but first I must know if
you are fearless, that I may not bestow my money in vain." "A soldier
and fear - how can those two things go together?" he answered, "You
can put me to the proof." "Very well, then," answered the man, "look
behind you." The soldier turned round, and saw a large bear, which
came growling towards him.  "Oho," cried the soldier, "I will tickle
your nose for you, so that you shall soon lose your fancy for
growling," and he aimed at the bear and shot it through the muzzle,
it fell down and never stirred again.  "I see quite well," said the
stranger, "that you are not wanting in courage, but there is still
another condition which you will have to fulfil." "If it does not
endanger my salvation," replied the soldier, who knew very well who
was standing by him.  "If it does, I'll have nothing to do with it."
"You will look to that for yourself," answered greencoat, "you shall
for the next seven years neither wash yourself, nor comb your beard,
nor your hair, nor cut your nails, nor once say the Lord's prayer.  I
will give you a coat and a cloak, which during this time you must
wear.  If you die during these seven years, you are mine, if you
remain alive, you are free, and rich to boot, for all the rest of
your life." The soldier thought of the great extremity in which he
now found himself, and as he so often had gone to meet death, he
resolved to risk it now also, and agreed to the terms.  The devil
took off his green coat, and gave it to the soldier, and said, "If
you have this coat on your back and put your hand into the pocket,
you will always find it full of money." Then he pulled the skin off
the bear and said, "This shall be your cloak, and your bed also, for
thereon shall you sleep, and and in no other bed shall you lie, and
because of this apparel shall you be called Bearskin." Whereupon the
devil vanished.

The soldier put the coat on, felt at once in the pocket, and found
that the thing was really true.  Then he put on the bearskin and went
forth into the world, and enjoyed himself, refraining from nothing
that did him good and his money harm.

During the first year his appearance was passable, but during the
second he began to look like a monster.  His hair covered nearly the
whole of his face, his beard was like a piece of coarse felt, his
fingers had claws, and his face was so covered with dirt that if
cress had been sown on it, it would have come up.  Whosoever saw him,
ran away, but as he everywhere gave the poor money to pray that he
might not die during the seven years, and as he paid well for
everything he still always found shelter.

In the fourth year, he entered an inn where the landlord would not
receive him, and would not even let him have a place in the stable,
because he was afraid the horses would be scared.  But as Bearskin
thrust his hand into his pocket and pulled out a handful of ducats,
the host let himself be persuaded and gave him a room in an outhouse.
Bearskin, however, was obliged to promise not to let himself be seen,
lest the inn should get a bad name.

As Bearskin was sitting alone in the evening, and wishing from the
bottom of his heart that the seven years were over, he heard a loud
lamenting in a neighboring room.  He had a compassionate heart, so he
opened the door, and saw an old man weeping bitterly, and wringing
his hands.  Bearskin went nearer, but the man sprang to his feet and
tried to escape from him. At last when the man perceived that
Bearskin's voice was human he let himself be prevailed upon, and by
kind words bearskin succeeded so far that the old man revealed the
cause of his grief. His property had dwindled away by degrees, he and
his daughters would have to starve, and he was so poor that he could
not pay the innkeeper, and was to be put in prison.  "If that is your
only trouble," said Bearskin, "I have plenty of money." He caused the
innkeeper to be brought thither, paid him and even put a purse full
of gold into the poor old man's pocket.

When the old man saw himself set free from all his troubles he did
not know how to show his gratitude.  "Come with me," said he to
Bearskin, "my daughters are all miracles of beauty, choose one of
them for yourself as a wife.  When she hears what you have done for
me, she will not refuse you.  You do in truth look a little strange,
but she will soon put you to rights again." This pleased Bearskin
well, and he went.  When the eldest saw him she was so terribly
alarmed at his face that she screamed and ran away.  The second stood
still and looked at him from head to foot, but then she said, "How
can I accept a husband who no longer has a human form?  The shaven
bear that once was here and passed itself off for a man pleased me
far better, for at any rate it wore a hussar's dress and white
gloves.  If he were only ugly, I might get used to that." The
youngest, however, said, "Dear father, that must be a good man to
have helped you out of your trouble, so if you have promised him a
bride for doing it, your promise must be kept." It was a pity that
Bearskin's face was covered with dirt and with hair, for if not they
might have seen how delighted he was when he heard these words.  He
took a ring from his finger, broke it in two, and gave her one half,
the other he kept for himself.  Then he wrote his name on her half,
and hers on his, and begged her to keep her piece carefully. Then he
took his leave and said, "I must still wander about for three years,
and if I do not return then, you are free, for I shall be dead.  But
pray to God to preserve my life."

The poor betrothed bride dressed herself entirely in black, and when
she thought of her future bridegroom, tears came into her eyes.
Nothing but contempt and mockery fell to her lot from her sisters.
"Take care," said the eldest, "if you give him your hand, he will
strike his claws into it." "Beware," said the second.  "Bears like
sweet things, and if he takes a fancy to you, he will eat you up."
"You must always do as he likes," began the elder again, or else he
will growl." And the second continued, "But the wedding will be a
merry one, for bears dance well." The bride was silent, and did not
let them vex her.  Bearskin, however, traveled about the world from
one place to another, did good where he was able, and gave generously
to the poor that they might pray for him.

At length, as the last day of the seven years dawned, he went once
more out on to the heath, and seated himself beneath the circle of
trees.  It was not long before the wind whistled, and the devil stood
before him and looked angrily at him, then he threw bearskin his
coat, and asked for his own green one back. "We have not got so far
as that yet," answered Bearskin, "you must first make me clean."
Whether the devil liked it or not, he was forced to fetch water, and
wash Bearskin, comb his hair, and cut his nails.  After this, he
looked like a brave soldier, and was much handsomer than he had ever
been before.

When the devil had gone away, Bearskin was quite lighthearted. He
went into the town, put on a magnificent velvet coat, seated himself
in a carriage drawn by four white horses, and drove to his bride's
house.  No one recognized him.  The father took him for a
distinguished general, and led him into the room where his daughters
were sitting.  He was forced to place himself between the two eldest,
who helped him to wine, gave him the best pieces of meat, and thought
that in all the world they had never seen a handsomer man.  The
bride, however, sat opposite to him in her black dress, and never
raised her eyes, nor spoke a word.  When at length he asked the
father if he would give him one of his daughters to wife, the two
eldest jumped up, ran into their bedrooms to put on splendid dresses,
for each of them fancied she was the chosen one.

The stranger, as soon as he was alone with his bride, brought out his
half of the ring, and threw it in a glass of wine which he handed
across the table to her.  She took the wine, but when she had drunk
it, and found the half ring lying at the bottom, her heart began to
beat.  She got the other half, which she wore on a ribbon round her
neck, joined them, and saw that the two pieces fitted exactly
together.  Then said he, "I am your betrothed bridegroom, whom you
saw as Bearskin, but through God's grace I have again received my
human form, and have once more become clean." He went up to her,
embraced her, and gave her a kiss.  In the meantime the two sisters
came back in full dress, and when they saw that the handsome man had
fallen to the share of the youngest, and heard that he was Bearskin,
they ran out full of anger and rage.  One of them drowned herself in
the well, the other hanged herself on a tree.  In the evening, some
one knocked at the door, and when the bridegroom opened it, it was
the devil in his green coat, who said, "You see, I have now got two
souls in the place of your one."
Once in summer-time the bear and the wolf were walking in the forest,
and the bear heard a bird singing so beautifully that he said,
"Brother wolf, what bird is it that sings so well?" "That is the king
of birds," said the wolf, "before whom we must bow down." In reality
the bird was the willow-wren.  "If that's the case," said the bear,
"I should very much like to see his royal palace, come, take me
thither." "That is not done quite as you seem to think," said the
wolf, "you must wait until the queen comes." Soon afterwards the
queen arrived with some food in her beak, and the lord king came too,
and they began to feed their young ones.  The bear would have liked
to go at once, but the wolf held him back by the sleeve, and said,
no, you must wait until the lord and lady queen have gone away again.
So they took stock of the hole where the nest lay, and trotted away.

The bear, however, could not rest until he had seen the royal palace,
and when a short time had passed, went to it again.  The king and
queen had just flown out, so he peeped in and saw five or six young
ones lying there.  "Is that the royal palace," cried the bear, "it is
a wretched palace, and you are not king's children, you are
disreputable children." When the young wrens heard that, they were
frightfully angry, and screamed, "No, that we are not.  Our parents
are honest people. Bear, you will have to pay for that."

The bear and the wolf grew uneasy, and turned back and went into
their holes.  The young willow-wrens, however, continued to cry and
scream, and when their parents again brought food they said, "We will
not so much as touch one fly's leg, no, not if we were dying of
hunger, until you have settled whether we are respectable children or
not, the bear has been here and has insulted us." Then the old king
said, "Be easy, he shall be punished," and he at once flew with the
queen to the bear's cave, and called in, "Old growler, why have you
insulted my children? You shall suffer for it - we will punish you by
a bloody war."

Thus war was announced to the bear, and all four-footed animals were
summoned to take part in it, oxen, asses, cows, deer, and every other
animal the earth contained.  And the willow-wren summoned everything
which flew in the air, not only birds, large and small, but midges,
and hornets, bees and flies had to come. When the time came for the
war to begin, the willow-wren sent out spies to discover who was the
enemy's commander-in-chief.

The gnat, who was the most crafty, flew into the forest where the
enemy was assembled, and hid herself beneath a leaf of the tree where
the password was to be announced.  There stood the bear, and he
called the fox before him and said, "Fox, you are the most cunning of
all animals, you shall be general and lead us." "Good," said the fox,
"but what signal shall we agree upon?" No one knew that, so the fox
said, "I have a fine long bushy tail, which almost looks like a plume
of red feathers. When I lift my tail up quite high, all is going
well, and you must charge, but if I let it hang down, run away as
fast as you can." When the gnat had heard that, she flew away again,
and revealed everything, down to the minutest detail, to the
willow-wren.

When day broke, and the battle was to begin, all the four-footed
animals came running up with such a noise that the earth trembled.
The willow-wren with his army also came flying through the air with
such a humming, and whirring, and swarming that every one was uneasy
and afraid, and on both sides they advanced against each other.  But
the willow-wren sent down the hornet, with orders to settle beneath
the fox's tail, and sting with all his might.  When the fox felt the
first sting, he started so that he lifted one leg, from pain, but he
bore it, and still kept his tail high in the air, at the second
sting, he was forced to put it down for a moment, at the third, he
could hold out no longer, screamed, and put his tail between his
legs. When the animals saw that, they thought all was lost, and began
to flee, each into his hole, and the birds had won the battle.

Then the king and queen flew home to their children and cried,
"Children, rejoice, eat and drink to your heart's content, we have
won the battle.  But the young wrens said, we will not eat yet, the
bear must come to the nest, and beg for pardon and say that we are
honorable children, before we will do that." Then the willow-wren
flew to the bear's hole and cried, "Growler, you are to come to the
nest to my children, and beg their pardon, or else every rib of your
body shall be broken." So the bear crept thither in the greatest
fear, and begged their pardon.  And now at last the young wrens were
satisfied, and sat down together and ate and drank, and made merry
till quite late into the night.
There was a poor but good little girl who lived alone with her
mother, and they no longer had anything to eat.  So the child went
into the forest, and there an aged woman met her who was aware of her
sorrow, and presented her with a little pot, which when she said,
cook, little pot, cook, would cook good, sweet porridge, and when she
said, stop, little pot, it ceased to cook.  The girl took the pot
home to her mother, and now they were freed from their poverty and
hunger, and ate sweet porridge as often as they chose.  Once on a
time when the girl had gone out, her mother said, cook, little pot,
cook.  And it did cook and she ate till she was satisfied, and then
she wanted the pot to stop cooking, but did not know the word.  So it
went on cooking and the porridge rose over the edge, and still it
cooked on until the kitchen and whole house were full, and then the
next house, and then the whole street, just as if it wanted to
satisfy the hunger of the whole world, and there was the greatest
distress, but no one knew how to stop it.  At last when only one
single house remained, the child came home and just said, stop,
little pot, and it stopped and gave up cooking, and whosoever wished
to return to the town had to eat his way back.
One day a peasant took his good hazel-stick out of the corner
and said to his wife, trina, I am going across country, and
shall not return for three days.  If during that time the
cattle-dealer should happen to call and want to buy our three
cows, you may strike a bargain at once, but not unless you can
get two hundred talers for them, nothing less, do you hear.  For
heaven's sake, just go in peace, answered the woman, I will
manage that.  You, indeed, said the man.  You once fell on your
head when you were a little child, and that affects you even now,
but let me tell you this, if you do anything foolish, I will
make your back black and blue, and not with paint, I assure
you, but with the stick which I have in my hand, and the coloring
shall last a whole year, you may rely on that.  And having said
that, the man went on his way.

Next morning the cattle-dealer came, and the woman had no
need to say many words to him.  When he had seen the cows and heard
the price, he said, I am quite willing to give that.  Honestly
speaking, they are worth it.  I will take the beasts away with
me at once.  He unfastened their chains and drove them out of
the byre, but just as he was going out of the yard-door, the
woman clutched him by the sleeve and said, you must give me the
two hundred talers now, or I cannot let the cows go.  True, answered the man,
but I have forgotten to buckle on my money-belt.  Have no fear,
however, you shall have security for my paying.  I will take two
cows with me and leave one, and then you will have a good pledge.

The woman saw the force of this, and let the man go away
with the cows, and thought to herself, how pleased Hans will be
when he finds how cleverly I have managed it.  The peasant came
home on the third day as he had said he would, and at once inquired
if the cows were sold.  Yes, indeed, dear Hans, answered the
woman, and as you said, for two hundred talers.  They are scarcely
worth so much, but the man took them without making any objection.
Where is the money, asked the peasant.  Oh, I have not got the
money, replied the woman, he had happened to forget his money-belt,
but he will soon bring it, and he left good security behind him.
What kind of security, asked the man.  One of the three cows, which
he shall not have until he has paid for the other two.  I have
managed very cunningly, for I have kept the smallest, which eats
the least.  The man was enraged and lifted up his stick, and was
just going to give her the beating he had promised her, when
suddenly he let the stick fail and said, you
are the stupidest goose that ever waddled on God's earth, but
I am sorry for you.  I will go out into the highways and wait for
three days to see if I find anyone who is still stupider than you.
If I succeed in doing so, you shall go scot-free, but if I do not
find him, you shall receive your well-deserved reward without any
discount.

He went out into the great highways, sat down on a stone, and
waited for what would happen.  Then he saw a peasant's waggon
coming towards him, and a woman was standing upright in the
middle of it, instead of sitting on the bundle of straw which
was lying beside her, or walking near the oxen and leading them.

The man thought to himself, that is certainly one of the kind I
am in search of, and jumped up and ran backwards and forwards in
front of the waggon like one who is not in his right mind.  What
do you want, my friend, said the woman to him.  I don't know you,
where do you come from.  I have fallen down from heaven, replied
the man, and don't know how to get back again, couldn't you drive
me up.  No, said the woman, I don't know the way, but if you come
from heaven you can surely tell me how my husband is, who has been
there these three years.  You must have seen him.  Oh, yes, I
have seen him, but all men can't get on well.  He keeps sheep,
and the sheep give him a great deal to do.  They run up the
mountains and lose their way in the wilderness, and he has to run
after them and drive them together again.  His clothes are
all torn to pieces too, and will soon fall off his body.  There is
no tailor there, for saint peter won't let any of them in, as you
know by the story.  Who would have thought it, cried the woman, I
tell you what, I will fetch his sunday coat which is still hanging
at home in the cupboard.  He can wear that and look respectable.
You will be so kind as to take it with you.  That won't do very
well, answered the peasant, people are not allowed to take clothes
into heaven, they are taken away at the gate.  Then listen, said
the woman, I sold my fine wheat yesterday and got a good lot of
money for it, I will send that to him.  If you hide the purse in
your pocket, no one will know that you have it.  If you can't
manage it any other way, said the peasant, I will do you that
favor.  Just
sit still where you are, said she, and I will drive home and fetch
the purse, I shall soon be back again.  I do not sit down on the
bundle of straw, but stand up in the waggon, because it makes it
lighter for the cattle.

She drove her oxen away, and the peasant
thought, that woman has a perfect talent for folly, if she really
brings the money, my wife may think herself fortunate, for she
will get no beating.  It was not long before she came in a great
hurry with the money, and with her own hands put it in his pocket.
Before she went away, she thanked him again a thousand times for
his courtesy.

When the woman got home again, she found her son who had come in
from the field.  She told him what unexpected things had befallen
her, and then added, I am truly delighted at having found an
opportunity of sending something to my poor husband.  Who would
ever have imagined that he could be suffering for want of anything
up in heaven.  The son was full of astonishment.  Mother, said he,
it is not every day that a man comes from heaven in this way, I
will go out immediately, and see if he is still to be found, he
must tell me what it is like up there, and how the work is done.

He saddled the horse and rode off with all speed.  He found the
peasant who was sitting under a willow-tree, and was about to
count the money in the purse.  Have you seen the man who has
fallen down from heaven, cried the youth to him.  Yes, answered the
peasant, he has set out on his way back there, and has gone up
that hill, from whence it will be rather nearer, you could still
catch him up, if you were to ride fast.  Alas, said the youth, I
have been doing tiring work all day, and the ride here has
completely worn me out, you know the man, be so kind as to get on
my horse, and go and persuade him to come here.  Aha, thought the
peasant, here is another who has not a brain in his head.  Why
should I not do you this favor, said he, and mounted the horse and
rode off at a quick trot.  The youth remained sitting there till
night fell, but the peasant never came back.  The man from heaven
must certainly have been in a great hurry, and would not turn back,
thought he, and the peasant has no doubt given
him the horse to take to my father.  He went home and told his
mother what had happened, and that he had sent his father the
horse so that he might not have to be always running about.  You
have done well, answered she, your legs are younger than his, and
you can go on foot.

When the peasant got home, he put the horse in the stable beside
the cow which he had as a pledge, and then went to his wife and
said, trina, as your luck would have it, I have found two who
are still sillier fools than you, this time you escape without
a beating.  I will store it up for another occasion.  Then he
lighted his pipe, sat down in his grandfather's chair, and said,
it was a good stroke of business to get a sleek horse and a great
purse full of money into the bargain, for two lean cows.  If
stupidity always brought in as much as that, I would be quite
willing to hold it in honor.  So thought the peasant, but you
no doubt prefer simpletons.
There was once a little child whose mother gave her every
afternoon a small bowl of milk and bread, and the child seated
herself in the yard with it.  But when she began to eat,
a paddock came creeping out of a crevice in the wall, dipped its
little head in the dish, and ate with her.  The child took pleasure
in this, and when she was sitting there with her little dish and
the paddock did not come at once, she cried,
               paddock, paddock, come swiftly
               hither come, thou tiny thing,
               thou shalt have thy crumbs of bread,
               thou shalt refresh thyself with milk.

Then the paddock came in haste, and enjoyed its food.  It even
showed gratitude, for it brought the child all kinds of pretty
things from its hidden treasures, bright stones, pearls, and golden
playthings.  The paddock, however, drank only the milk, and left
the bread-crumbs alone.  Then one day the child took its little
spoon and struck the paddock gently on its head, and said, eat the
bread-crumbs as well, little thing.  The mother, who was standing
in the kitchen, heard the child talking to someone, and when she
saw that she was striking a paddock with her spoon, ran out with
a log of wood, and killed the good little creature.

From that time forth, a change came over the child.  As long as
the paddock had eaten with her, she had grown tall and strong, but
now she lost her pretty rosy cheeks and wasted away.  It was not
long before the funeral bird began to cry in the night, and the
redbreast to collect little branches and leaves for a funeral
wreath and soon afterwards the child lay on her bier.

                         II
An orphan child was sitting by the town walls spinning, when she
saw a paddock coming out of a hole low down in the wall.  Swiftly
she spread out beside it one of the blue silk handkerchiefs for
which paddocks have such a strong liking, and which are the only
things they will creep on.  As soon as the paddock saw it, it
went back, then returned, bringing with it a small golden crown,
laid it on the handkerchief, and then went away again.  The girl took
up the crown, which glittered and was of delicate golden filagree
work.  It was not long before the paddock came back for the second
time, but when it did not see the crown any more, it crept up
to the wall, and in its grief smote its little head against it
as long as it had strength to do so, until at last it lay there
dead.  If the girl had but left the crown where it was, the paddock
would certainly have brought still more of its treasures out of
the hole.

                         III
The paddock cries, huhu, huhu.  The child says, come out.  The
paddock comes out, whereupon the child inquires about her little
sister, have you not seen little red-stockings.  The paddock says,
no, I have not.  Have you.  Huhu, huhu, huhu.
In a certain mill lived an old miller who had neither wife nor child,
and three apprentices served under him.  As they had been with him
several years, he one day said to them, "I am old, and want to sit
behind the stove.  Go out, and whichsoever of you brings me the best
horse home, to him will I give the mill, and in return for it he
shall take care of me till my death."

The third of the boys, however, was the dunce, who was looked on as
foolish by the others, they begrudged the mill to him, and afterwards
he would not even have it.  Then all three went out together, and
when they came to the village, the two said to stupid Hans, "You may
just as well stay here, as long as you live you will never get a
horse." Hans, however, went with them, and when it was night they
came to a cave in which they lay down to sleep.  The two smart ones
waited until Hans had fallen asleep, then they got up, and went away
leaving him where he was.  And they thought they had done a very
clever thing, but it was certain to turn out ill for them.

When the sun rose, and Hans woke up, he was lying in a deep cavern.
He looked around on every side and exclaimed, "Oh, heavens, where am
I?" Then he got up and clambered out of the cave, went into the
forest, and thought, "Here I am quite alone and deserted, how shall I
obtain a horse now?" Whilst he was thus walking full of thought, he
met a small tabby-cat which said quite kindly, "Hans, where are you
going?" "Alas, you can not help me." "I well know your desire," said
the cat.  "You wish to have a beautiful horse.  Come with me, and be
my faithful servant for seven years long, and then I will give you
one more beautiful than any you have ever seen in your whole life."
"Well, this is a strange cat," thought Hans, "But I am determined to
see if she is telling the truth."

So she took him with her into her enchanted castle, where there were
nothing but kittens who were her servants.  They leapt nimbly
upstairs and downstairs, and were merry and happy.  In the evening
when they sat down to dinner, three of them had to make music.  One
played the bass viol, the other the fiddle, and the third put the
trumpet to his lips, and blew out his cheeks as much as he possibly
could.  When they had dined, the table was carried away, and the cat
said, "Now, Hans, come and dance with me." "No," said he, "I won't
dance with a pussy cat.  I have never done that yet." "Then take him
to bed," said she to the cats.  So one of them lighted him to his
bed-room, one pulled his shoes off, one his stockings, and at last
one of them blew out the candle.  Next morning they returned and
helped him out of bed, one put his stockings on for him, one tied his
garters, one brought his shoes, one washed him, and one dried his
face with her tail.  "That feels very soft," said Hans.

He, however, had to serve the cat, and chop some wood every day, and
to do that, he had an axe of silver, and the wedge and saw were of
silver and the mallet of copper.  So he chopped the wood small,
stayed there in the house and had good meat and drink, but never saw
anyone but the tabby-cat and her servants.  Once she said to him, "Go
and mow my meadow, and dry the grass," and gave him a scythe of
silver, and a whetstone of gold, but bade him deliver them up again
carefully.  So Hans went thither, and did what he was bidden, and
when he had finished the work, he carried the scythe, whetstone, and
hay to the house, and asked if it was not yet time for her to give
him his reward.  "No," said the cat, "you must first do something
more for me of the same kind.  There is timber of silver, carpenter's
axe, square, and everything that is needful, all of silver - with
these build me a small house." Then Hans built the small house, and
said that he had now done everything, and still he had no horse.

Nevertheless the seven years had gone by with him as if they were six
months.  The cat asked him if he would like to see her horses. "Yes,"
said Hans.  Then she opened the door of the small house, and when she
had opened it, there stood twelve horses, - such horses, so bright
and shining, that his heart rejoiced at the sight of them.  And now
she gave him to eat and drink, and said, "Go home, I will not give
you your horse now, but in three days, time I will follow you and
bring it." So Hans set out, and she showed him the way to the mill.

She, however, had never once given him a new coat, and he had been
obliged to keep on his dirty old smock, which he had brought with
him, and which during the seven years had everywhere become too small
for him.  When he reached home, the two other apprentices were there
again as well, and each of them certainly had brought a horse with
him, but one of them was a blind one, and the other lame.  They asked
Hans where his horse was.  "It will follow me in three days, time."
Then they laughed and said, "Indeed, stupid Hans, where will you get
a horse?" "It will be a fine one." Hans went into the parlor, but the
miller said he should not sit down to table, for he was so ragged and
torn, that they would all be ashamed of him if any one came in.  So
they gave him a mouthful of food outside, and at night, when they
went to rest, the two others would not let him have a bed, and at
last he was forced to creep into the goose-house, and lie down on a
little hard straw.

In the morning when he awoke, the three days had passed, and a coach
came with six horses and they shone so bright that it was delightful
to see them - and a servant brought a seventh as well, which was for
the poor miller's boy.  And a magnificent princess alighted from the
coach and went into the mill, and this princess was the little
tabby-cat whom poor Hans had served for seven years.  She asked the
miller where the miller's boy and dunce was.  Then the miller said,
"We cannot have him here in the mill, for he is so ragged, he is
lying in the goose-house." Then the king's daughter said that they
were to bring him immediately.  So they brought him out, and he had
to hold his little smock together to cover himself.  The servants
unpacked splendid garments, and washed him and dressed him, and when
that was done, no king could have looked more handsome.  Then the
maiden desired to see the horses which the other apprentices had
brought home with them, and one of them was blind and the other lame.
So she ordered the servant to bring the seventh horse, and when the
miller saw it, he said that such a horse as that had never yet
entered his yard. "And that is for the third miller's boy," said she.
"Then he must have the mill," said the miller, but the king's
daughter said that the horse was there, and that he was to keep his
mill as well, and took her faithful Hans and set him in the coach,
and drove away with him.

They first drove to the little house which he had built with the
silver tools, and behold it was a great castle, and everything inside
it was of silver and gold, and then she married him, and he was rich,
so rich that he had enough for all the rest of his life.  After this,
let no one ever say that anyone who is silly can never become a
person of importance.
Hill and vale do not meet, but the children of men do, good and bad.
In this way a shoemaker and a tailor once met on their travels.  The
tailor was a handsome little fellow who was always merry and full of
enjoyment.  He saw the shoemaker coming towards him from the other
side, and as he observed by his bag what kind of a trade he plied, he
sang a little mocking song to him,
     sew me the seam,
     draw me the thread,
     spread it over with pitch,
     knock the nail on the head.

The shoemaker, however, could not bear a joke, he pulled a face as if
he had drunk vinegar, and made a gesture as if he were about to seize
the tailor by the throat.  But the little fellow began to laugh,
reached him his bottle, and said, "No harm was meant, take a drink,
and swallow your anger down." The shoemaker took a very hearty drink,
and the storm on his face began to clear away. He gave the bottle
back to the tailor, and said, "I took a hearty gulp, they say it
comes from much drinking, but not from great thirst.  Shall we travel
together?" "All right," answered the tailor, "if only it suits you to
go into a big town where there is no lack of work." "That is just
where I want to go," answered the shoemaker.  "In a small hamlet
there is nothing to earn, and in the country, people like to go
barefoot." They traveled therefore onwards together, and always set
one foot before the other like a weasel in the snow.

Both of them had time enough, but little to bite and to break. When
they reached a town they went about and paid their respects to the
tradesmen, and because the tailor looked so lively and merry, and had
such fine red cheeks, every one gave him work willingly, and when
luck was good the master's daughters gave him a kiss beneath the
porch, as well.  When he again fell in with the shoemaker, the tailor
had always the most in his bundle. The ill-tempered shoemaker made a
wry face, and thought, the greater the rascal the more the luck.  But
the tailor began to laugh and to sing, and shared all he got with his
comrade.  If a couple of pence jingled in his pockets, he ordered
good cheer, and thumped the table in his joy till the glasses danced
and it was lightly come, lightly go, with him.

When they had traveled for some time, they came to a great forest
through which passed the road to the capital.  Two foot-paths,
however, led through it, one of which was a seven days, journey and
the other only two, but neither of the travelers knew which way was
the short one.  They seated themselves beneath an oak-tree, and took
counsel together how they should forecast, and for how many days they
should provide themselves with bread.

The shoemaker said, "One must look before one leaps, I will take with
me bread for a week." "What," said the tailor, "drag bread for seven
days on one's back like a beast of burden and not be able to look
about?  I shall trust in God, and not trouble myself about anything.
The money I have in my pocket is as good in summer as in winter, but
in hot weather bread gets dry, and moldy into the bargain, even my
coat does not last as far as it might.  Besides, why should we not
find the right way?  Bread for two days, and that's enough." Each,
therefore, bought his own bread, and then they tried their luck in
the forest.

It was as quiet there as in a church.  No wind stirred, no brook
murmured, no bird sang, and through the thickly-leaved branches no
sunbeam forced its way.  The shoemaker spoke never a word, the bread
weighed so heavily on his back that the sweat streamed down his cross
and gloomy face.  The tailor, however, was quite merry, he jumped
about, whistled on a leaf, or sang a song, and thought to himself,
God in heaven must be pleased to see me so happy.

This lasted two days, but on the third the forest would not come to
an end, and the tailor had eaten up all his bread, so after all his
heart sank down a yard deeper.  Nevertheless, he did not lose
courage, but relied on God and on his luck.  On the evening of the
third day he lay down hungry under a tree, and rose again next
morning hungry still, so also passed the fourth day, and when the
shoemaker seated himself on a fallen tree and devoured his dinner the
tailor was only a spectator.  If he begged for a little piece of
bread, the other laughed mockingly, and said, "You have always been
so merry, now you can see for once what it is to be sad, the birds
which sing too early in the morning are struck by the hawk in the
evening." In short, he was pitiless.  But on the fifth morning the
poor tailor could no longer stand up, and was hardly able to utter
one word for weakness, his cheeks were white, and his eyes were red.
Then the shoemaker said to him, "I will give you a bit of bread
to-day, but in return for it, I will put out your right eye." The
unhappy tailor who still wished to save his life, had to submit, he
wept once more with both eyes, and then held them out, and the
shoemaker, who had a heart of stone, put out his right eye with a
sharp knife.  The tailor called to remembrance what his mother had
formerly said to him when he had been eating secretly in the pantry.
Eat what one can, and suffer what one must.  When he had consumed his
dearly-bought bread, he got on his legs again, forgot his misery and
comforted himself with the thought that he could always see enough
with one eye.

But on the sixth day, hunger made itself felt again and gnawed him
almost to the heart.  In the evening he fell down by a tree, and on
the seventh morning he could not raise himself up for faintness, and
death was close at hand.  Then said the shoemaker, "I will show mercy
and give you bread once more, but you shall not have it for nothing,
I shall put out your other eye for it."

And now the tailor felt how thoughtless his life had been, prayed to
God for forgiveness, and said, "Do what you will, I will bear what I
must, but remember that our Lord God does not always look on
passively, and that an hour will come when the evil deed which you
have done to me, and which I have not deserved of you, will be
requited.  When times were good with me, I shared what I had with
you.  My trade is of that kind that each stitch must always be
exactly like the other.  If I no longer have my eyes and can sew no
more I must go a-begging.  At any rate do not leave me here alone
when I am blind, or I shall die of hunger." The shoemaker, however,
who had driven God out of his heart, took the knife and put out his
left eye.  Then he gave him a bit of bread to eat, held out a stick
to him, and drew him on behind him.

When the sun went down, they got out of the forest, and before them
in the open country stood the gallows.  Thither the shoemaker guided
the blind tailor, and then left him alone and went his way.
Weariness, pain, and hunger made the wretched man fall asleep, and he
slept the whole night.  When day dawned he awoke, but knew not where
he lay.  Two poor sinners were hanging on the gallows, and a crow sat
on the head of each of them.  Then one of the men who had been hanged
began to speak, and said, "Brother, are you awake?" "Yes, I am
awake," answered the second.  "Then I will tell you something," said
the first, "the dew which this night has fallen down over us from the
gallows, gives every one who washes himself with it his eyes again.
If blind people did but know this, how many would regain their sight
who do not believe that to be possible."

When the tailor heard that, he took his pocket-handkerchief, pressed
it on the grass, and when it was moist with dew, washed the sockets
of his eyes with it.  Immediately was fulfilled what the man on the
gallows had said, and a couple of healthy new eyes filled the
sockets.  It was not long before the tailor saw the sun rise behind
the mountains, in the plain before him lay the great royal city with
its magnificent gates and hundred towers, and the golden balls and
crosses which were on the spires began to shine.  He could
distinguish every leaf on the trees, saw the birds which flew past,
and the midges which danced in the air. He took a needle out of his
pocket, and as he could thread it as well as ever he had done, his
heart danced with delight.  He threw himself on his knees, thanked
God for the mercy he had shown him, and said his morning prayer.  Nor
did he forget to pray for the poor sinners who were hanging there
swinging against each other in the wind like the pendulums of clocks.
Then he took his bundle on his back and soon forgot the pain of heart
he had endured, and went on his way singing and whistling.

The first thing he met was a brown foal running about the fields at
large.  He caught it by the mane, and wanted to spring on it and ride
into the town.  The foal, however, begged to be set free.  "I am
still too young," it said, "even a light tailor such as you are would
break my back in two - let me go till I have grown strong.  A time
may perhaps come when I may reward you for it." "Run off," said the
tailor, "I see you are still a giddy thing." He gave it a touch with
a switch over its back, whereupon it kicked up its hind legs for joy,
leapt over hedges and ditches, and galloped away into the open
country.

But the little tailor had eaten nothing since the day before. The sun
to be sure fills my eyes, said he, but the bread does not fill my
mouth.  The first thing that comes my way and is even half edible
will have to suffer for it.  In the meantime a stork stepped solemnly
over the meadow towards him.  "Halt, halt," cried the tailor, and
seized him by the leg.  "I don't know if you are good to eat or not,
but my hunger leaves me no great choice.  I must cut your head off,
and roast you." "Don't do that," replied the stork, "I am a sacred
bird which brings mankind great profit, and no one does me an injury.
Leave me my life, and I may do you good in some other way." "Well, be
off, cousin longlegs," said the tailor.  The stork rose up, let its
long legs hang down, and flew gently away.

"What's to be the end of this," said the tailor to himself at last,
"my hunger grows greater and greater, and my stomach more and more
empty.  Whatsoever comes in my way now is lost." At this point he saw
a couple of young ducks which were on a pond come swimming towards
him.  "You come just at the right moment," said he, and laid hold of
one of them and was about to wring its neck.  On this an old duck
which was hidden among the reeds, began to scream loudly, and swam to
him with open beak, and begged him urgently to spare her dear
children.  "Can you not imagine," said she, "how your mother would
mourn if any one wanted to carry you off, and give you your finishing
stroke." "Just be quiet," said the good-tempered tailor, "you shall
keep your children," and put the prisoner back into the water.

When he turned round, he was standing in front of an old tree which
was partly hollow, and saw some wild bees flying in and out of it.
"There I shall at once find the reward of my good deed," said the
tailor, "the honey will refresh me." But the queen-bee came out,
threatened him and said, "If you touch my people and destroy my nest,
our stings shall pierce your skin like ten thousand red-hot needles.
But if you leave us in peace and go your way, we will do you a
service for it another time."

The little tailor saw that here also nothing was to be done. Three
dishes empty and nothing on the fourth is a bad dinner.  He dragged
himself therefore with his starved-out stomach into the town, and as
it was just striking twelve, all was ready-cooked for him in the inn,
and he was able to sit down at once to dinner. When he was satisfied
he said, "Now I will get to work." He went round the town, sought a
master, and soon found a good situation. And as he had thoroughly
learnt his trade, it was not long before he became famous, and every
one wanted to have his new coat made by the little tailor, whose
importance increased daily.  "I can go no further in skill," said he,
"and yet things improve every day." At last the king appointed him
court-tailor.

But what odd things do happen in the world.  On the very same day his
former comrade the shoemaker also became court-shoemaker. When the
latter caught sight of the tailor, and saw that he had once more two
healthy eyes, his conscience troubled him.  "Before he takes revenge
on me," thought he to himself, "I must dig a pit for him." He,
however, who digs a pit for another, falls into it himself.  In the
evening when work was over and it had grown dusk, he stole to the
king and said, "Lord king, the tailor is an arrogant fellow and has
boasted that he will get the golden crown back again which was lost
in ancient times." "That would please me very much," said the king,
and he caused the tailor to be brought before him next morning, and
ordered him to get the crown back again, or to leave the town for
ever.  "Oho," thought the tailor, "a rogue gives more than he has
got.  If the surly king wants me to do what can be done by no one, I
will not wait till morning, but will go out of the town at once,
to-day."

He packed up his bundle, therefore, but when he was without the gate
he could not help being sorry to give up his good fortune, and turn
his back on the town in which all had gone so well with him.  He came
to the pond where he had made the acquaintance of the ducks, at that
very moment the old one whose young ones he had spared, was sitting
there by the shore, pluming herself with her beak. She knew him again
instantly, and asked why he was hanging his head so.  "You will not
be surprised when you hear what has befallen me," replied the tailor,
and told her his fate.  "If that be all," said the duck, "we can help
you.  The crown fell into the water, and it lies down below at the
bottom, we will soon bring it up again for you.  In the meantime just
spread out your handkerchief on the bank." She dived down with her
twelve young ones, and in five minutes she was up again and sat with
the crown resting on her wings, and the twelve young ones were
swimming round about and had put their beaks under it, and were
helping to carry it. They swam to the shore and put the crown on the
handkerchief. No one can imagine how magnificent the crown was, when
the sun shone on it, it gleamed like a hundred thousand carbuncles.
The tailor tied his handkerchief together by the four corners, and
carried it to the king, who was full of joy, and put a gold chain
round the tailor's neck.

When the shoemaker saw that one blow had failed, he contrived a
second, and went to the king and said, "Lord king, the tailor has
become insolent again, he boasts that he will copy in wax the whole
of the royal palace, with everything that pertains to it, loose or
fast, inside and out." The king sent for the tailor and ordered him
to copy in wax the whole of the royal palace, with everything that
pertained to it, movable or immovable, within and without, and if he
did not succeed in doing this, or if so much as one nail on the wall
were wanting, he should be imprisoned for his whole life underground.

The tailor thought, "It gets worse and worse.  No one can endure
that," and threw his bundle on his back, and went forth.  When he
came to the hollow tree, he sat down and hung his head.  The bees
came flying out, and the queen-bee asked him if he had a stiff neck,
since he hung his head so.  "Alas, no," answered the tailor,
"something quite different weighs me down," and he told her what the
king had demanded of him.  The bees began to buzz and hum amongst
themselves, and the queen-bee said, "Just go home again, but come
back to-morrow at this time, and bring a large sheet with you, and
then all will be well." So he turned back again, but the bees flew to
the royal palace and straight into it through the open windows, crept
round about into every corner, and inspected everything most
carefully.  Then they hurried back and modelled the palace in wax
with such rapidity that any one looking on would have thought it was
growing before his eyes.  By the evening all was ready, and when the
tailor came next morning, the whole of the splendid building was
there, and not one nail in the wall or tile of the roof was wanting,
and it was delicate withal, and white as snow, and smelt sweet as
honey.  The tailor wrapped it carefully in his cloth and took it to
the king, who could not admire it enough, placed it in his largest
hall, and in return for it presented the tailor with a large stone
house.

The shoemaker, however, did not give up, but went for the third time
to the king and said, "Lord king, it has come to the tailor's ears
that no water will spring up in the court-yard of the castle and he
has boasted that it shall rise up in the midst of the court-yard to a
man's height and be clear as crystal." Then the king ordered the
tailor to be brought before him and said, "If a stream of water does
not rise in my court-yard by to-morrow as you have promised, the
executioner shall in that very place make you shorter by a head." The
poor tailor did not take long to think about it, but hurried out to
the gate, and because this time it was a matter of life and death to
him, tears rolled down his face.

While he was thus going forth full of sorrow, the foal to which he
had formerly given its liberty, and which had now become a beautiful
chestnut horse, came leaping towards him.  "The time has come," it
said to the tailor, "when I can repay you for your good deed.  I know
already what is needful to you, but you shall soon have help, get on
me, my back can carry two such as you." The tailor's courage came
back to him, he jumped up in one bound, and the horse went full speed
into the town, and right up to the court-yard of the castle. It
galloped as quick as lightning thrice round it, and at the third time
it fell violently down.  At the same instant, however, there was a
terrific clap of thunder, a fragment of earth in the middle of the
court-yard sprang like a cannon-ball into the air, and over the
castle, and directly after it a jet of water rose as high as a man on
horseback, and the water was as pure as crystal, and the sunbeams
began to dance on it.  When the king saw this, he arose in amazement,
and went and embraced the tailor in the sight of all men.

But good fortune did not last long.  The king had daughters in
plenty, one still prettier than the other, but he had no son. So the
malicious shoemaker betook himself for the fourth time to the king,
and said, "Lord king, the tailor has not given up his arrogance.  He
has now boasted that if he liked, he could cause a son to be brought
to the lord king through the air." The king commanded the tailor to
be summoned, and said, "If you cause a son to be brought to me within
nine days, you shall have my eldest daughter to wife." "The reward is
indeed great," thought the little tailor, "one would willingly do
something for it, but the cherries grow too high for me, if I climb
for them, the bough will break beneath me, and I shall fall."

He went home, seated himself cross-legged on his work-table, and
thought over what was to be done.  "It can't be managed," cried he at
last, "I will go away, after all, I can't live in peace here." He
tied up his bundle and hurried away to the gate.  When he got to the
meadow, he perceived his old friend the stork, who was walking
backwards and forwards like a philosopher.  Sometimes he stood still,
took a frog into close consideration, and at length swallowed it
down.  The stork came to him and greeted him.  "I see," he began,
"that you have your pack on your back.  Why are you leaving the
town?" The tailor told him what the king had required of him, and how
he could not perform it, and lamented his misfortune. "Don't let that
turn your hair grey," said the stork, "I will help you out of your
difficulty.  For a long time now, I have carried the children in
swaddling-clothes into the town, so for once in a way, I can fetch a
little prince out of the well.  Go home and be easy.  In nine days
from this time repair to the royal palace, and there will I come."
The little tailor went home, and at the appointed time was at the
castle.  It was not long before the stork came flying thither and
tapped at the window.  The tailor opened it, and cousin longlegs came
carefully in, and walked with solemn steps over the smooth marble
pavement.  He had, moreover, a baby in his beak that was as lovely as
an angel, and stretched out its little hands to the queen.  The stork
laid it in her lap, and she caressed it and kissed it, and was beside
herself with delight.  Before the stork flew away, he took his
traveling bag off his back and handed it over to the queen.  In it
there were little paper parcels with colored sweetmeats, and they
were divided amongst the little princesses.  The eldest, however,
received none of them, but instead got the merry tailor for a
husband.  "It seems to me," said he, "just as if I had won the
highest prize.  My mother was if right after all, she always said
that whoever trusts in God and only has good luck, can never fail."

The shoemaker had to make the shoes in which the little tailor danced
at the wedding festival, after which he was commanded to quit the
town for ever.  The road to the forest led him to the gallows.  Worn
out with anger, rage, and the heat of the day, he threw himself down.
When he had closed his eyes and was about to sleep, the two crows
flew down from the heads of the men who were hanging there, and
pecked his eyes out.  In his madness he ran into the forest and must
have died there of hunger, for no one has ever either seen him or
heard of him again.
	Hans the Hedgehog

There was once a country man who had money and land in plenty, but
however rich he was, his happiness was still lacking in one respect -
he had no children.  Often when he went into the town with the other
peasants they mocked him and asked why he had no children.  At last
he became angry, and when he got home he said, "I will have a child,
even if it be a hedgehog." Then his wife had a child that was a
hedgehog in the upper part of his body and a boy in the lower, and
when she saw the child, she was terrified, and said, "See, there you
have brought ill-luck on us." Then said the man, "What can be done
now?  The boy must be christened, but we shall not be able to get a
godfather for him." The woman said, "And we cannot call him anything
else but Hans the hedgehog."

When he was christened, the parson said, "He cannot go into any
ordinary bed because of his spikes." So a little straw was put behind
the stove, and Hans the hedgehog was laid on it.  His mother could
not suckle him, for he would have pricked her with his quills.  So he
lay there behind the stove for eight years, and his father was tired
of him and thought, if he would but die.  He did not die, however,
but remained lying there.

Now it happened that there was a fair in the town, and the peasant
was about to go to it, and asked his wife what he should bring back
with him for her.  "A little meat and a couple of white rolls which
are wanted for the house," said she.  Then he asked the servant, and
she wanted a pair of slippers and some stockings with clocks. At last
he said also, "And what will you have, Hans my hedgehog?" "Dear
father," he said, "do bring me bagpipes." When, therefore, the father
came home again, he gave his wife what he had bought for her, meat
and white rolls, and then he gave the maid the slippers, and the
stockings with clocks, and, lastly, he went behind the stove, and
gave Hans the hedgehog the bagpipes.

And when Hans the hedgehog had the bagpipes, he said, "Dear father,
do go to the forge and get the cock shod, and then I will ride away,
and never come back again." At this, the father was delighted to
think that he was going to get rid of him, and had the cock shod for
him, and when it was done, Hans the hedgehog got on it, and rode
away, but took swine and asses with him which he intended to keep in
the forest.  When they got there he made the cock fly on to a high
tree with him, and there he sat for many a long year, and watched his
asses and swine until the herd was quite large, and his father knew
nothing about him.  And while he was sitting in the tree, he played
his bagpipes, and made music which was very beautiful.

Once a king came traveling by who had lost his way and heard the
music.  He was astonished at it, and sent his servant forth to look
all round and see from whence this music came.  He spied about, but
saw nothing but a little animal sitting up aloft on the tree, which
looked like a cock with a hedgehog on it which made this music.  Then
the king told the servant he was to ask why he sat there, and if he
knew the road which led to his kingdom.  So Hans the hedgehog
descended from the tree, and said he would show the way if the king
would write a bond and promise him whatever he first met in the royal
courtyard as soon as he arrived at home.  Then the king thought, I
can easily do that, Hans the hedgehog understands nothing, and I can
write what I like.  So the king took pen and ink and wrote something,
and when he had done it, Hans the hedgehog showed him the way, and he
got safely home.  But his daughter, when she saw him from afar, was
so overjoyed that she ran to meet him, and kissed him.  Then he
remembered Hans the hedgehog, and told her what had happened, and
that he had been forced to promise whatsoever first met him when he
got home, to a very strange animal which sat on a cock as if it were
a horse, and made beautiful music, but that instead of writing that
he should have what he wanted, he had written that he should not have
it. Thereupon the princess was glad, and said he had done well, for
she never would have gone away with the hedgehog.

Hans the hedgehog, however, looked after his asses and pigs, and was
always merry and sat on the tree and played his bagpipes. Now it came
to pass that another king came journeying by with his attendants and
runner, and he also had lost his way, and did not know how to get
home again because the forest was so large.  He likewise heard the
beautiful music from a distance, and asked his runner what that could
be, and told him to go and see.  Then the runner went under the tree,
and saw the cock sitting at the top of it, and Hans the hedgehog on
the cock.  The runner asked him what he was doing up there.  I am
keeping my asses and my pigs, but what is your desire.  The messenger
said that they had lost their way, and could not get back into their
own kingdom, and asked if he would not show them the way.  Then Hans
the hedgehog descended the tree with the cock, and told the aged king
that he would show him the way, if he would give him for his own
whatsoever first met him in front of his royal palace.  The king
said, "Yes," and wrote a promise to Hans the hedgehog that he should
have this.  That done, Hans rode on before him on the cock, and
pointed out the way, and the king reached his kingdom again in
safety.  When he got to the courtyard, there were great rejoicings.
Now he had an only daughter who was very beautiful, she ran to meet
him, threw her arms round his neck, and was delighted to have her old
father back again.  She asked him where in the world he had been so
long.  So he told her how he had lost his way, and had very nearly
not come back at all, but that as he was traveling through a great
forest, a creature, half hedgehog, half man, who was sitting astride
a cock in a high tree, and making music, had shown him the way and
helped him to get out, but that in return he had promised him
whatsoever first met him in the royal court-yard, and how that was
she herself, which made him unhappy now.  But on this she promised
that, for love of her father, she would willingly go with this Hans
if he came.

Hans the hedgehog, however, took care of his pigs, and the pigs
became more pigs until there were so many in number that the whole
forest was filled with them.  Then Hans the hedgehog resolved not to
live in the forest any longer, and sent word to his father to have
every stye in the village emptied, for he was coming with such a
great herd that all might kill who wished to do so.  When his father
heard that, he was troubled, for he thought Hans the hedgehog had
died long ago.  Hans the hedgehog, however, seated himself on the
cock, and drove the pigs before him into the village, and ordered the
slaughter to begin.

Ha. - Then there was a butchery and a chopping that might have been
heard two miles off.  After this Hans the hedgehog said, "Father, let
me have the cock shod once more at the forge, and then I will ride
away and never come back as long as I live." Then the father had the
cock shod once more, and was pleased that Hans the hedgehog would
never return again.

Hans the hedgehog rode away to the first kingdom.  There the king had
commanded that whosoever came mounted on a cock and had bagpipes with
him should be shot at, cut down, or stabbed by everyone, so that he
might not enter the palace.  When, therefore, Hans the hedgehog came
riding thither, they all pressed forward against him with their
pikes, but he spurred the cock and it flew up over the gate in front
of the king's window and lighted there, and Hans cried that the king
must give him what he had promised, or he would take both his life
and his daughter's.  Then the king began to speak to his daughter,
and to beg her to go away with Hans in order to save her own life and
her father's.  So she dressed herself in white, and her father gave
her a carriage with six horses and magnificent attendants together
with gold and possessions.  She seated herself in the carriage, and
placed Hans the hedgehog beside her with the cock and the bagpipes,
and then they took leave and drove away, and the king thought he
should never see her again.  But he was deceived in his expectation
for when they were at a short distance from the town, Hans the
hedgehog took her pretty clothes off, and pierced her with his
hedgehog's spikes until she bled all over.  "That is the reward of
your falseness," said he. "Go your way, I will not have you," and on
that he chased her home again, and she was disgraced for the rest of
her life.

Hans the hedgehog, however, rode on further on the cock, with his
bagpipes, to the dominions of the second king to whom he had shown
the way.  But this one had arranged that if any one resembling Hans
the hedgehog should come, they were to present arms, give him safe
conduct, cry long life to him, and lead him to the royal palace.

But when the king's daughter saw him she was terrified, for he really
looked too strange.  Then she remembered that she could not change
her mind, for she had given her promise to her father. So Hans the
hedgehog was welcomed by her, and married to her, and had to go with
her to the royal table, and she seated herself by his side, and they
ate and drank.  When the evening came and they wanted to go to sleep,
she was afraid of his quills, but he told her she was not to fear,
for no harm would befall her, and he told the old king that he was to
appoint four men to watch by the door of the chamber, and light a
great fire, and when he entered the room and was about to get into
bed, he would creep out of his hedgehog's skin and leave it lying
there by the bedside, and that the men were to run nimbly to it,
throw it in the fire, and stay by it until it was consumed.

When the clock struck eleven, he went into the chamber, stripped off
the hedgehog's skin, and left it lying by the bed.  Then came the men
and fetched it swiftly, and threw it in the fire, and when the fire
had consumed it, he was saved, and lay there in bed in human form,
but he was coal-black as if he had been burnt.  The king sent for his
physician who washed him with precious salves, and anointed him, and
he became white, and was a handsome young man.  When the king's
daughter saw that she was glad, and the next morning they arose
joyfully, ate and drank, and then the marriage was properly
solemnized, and Hans the hedgehog received the kingdom from the aged
king.

When several years had passed he went with his wife to his father,
and said that he was his son.  The father, however, declared he had
no son - he had never had but one, and he had been born like a
hedgehog with spikes, and had gone forth into the world. Then Hans
made himself known, and the old father rejoiced and went with him to
his kingdom.
                    My tale is done,
                    and away it has run
                    to little augusta's house.
There was once a mother who had a little boy of seven years old, who
was so handsome and lovable that no one could look at him without
liking him, and she herself worshipped him above everything in the
world.  Now it so happened that he suddenly became ill, and God took
him to himself, and for this the mother could not be comforted and
wept both day and night.  But soon afterwards, when the child had
been buried, it appeared by night in the places where it had sat and
played during its life, and if the mother wept, it wept also, and
when morning came it disappeared.  But as the mother would not stop
crying, it came one night, in the little white shroud in which it had
been laid in its coffin, and with its wreath of flowers round its
head, and stood on the bed at her feet, and said, "Oh, mother, do
stop crying, or I shall never fall asleep in my coffin, for my shroud
will not dry because of all your tears, which fall upon it." The
mother was afraid when she heard that, and wept no more.  The next
night the child came again, and held a little light in its hand, and
said, "Look, mother, my shroud is nearly dry, and I can rest in my
grave." Then the mother gave her sorrow into God's keeping, and bore
it quietly and patiently, and the child came no more, but slept in
its little bed beneath the earth.
There was once a young fellow who had learnt the trade of locksmith,
and told his father he would now go out into the world and seek his
fortune.  Very well, said the father, I am quite content with that,
and gave him some money for his journey.  So he traveled about and
looked for work.  After a time he resolved not to follow the trade of
locksmith any more, for he no longer liked it, but he took a fancy
for hunting.

Then there met him in his rambles a huntsman dressed in green, who
asked whence he came and whither he was going.  The youth said he was
a locksmith's apprentice, but that the trade no longer pleased him,
and he had a liking for huntsmanship, would he teach it to him.  "Oh,
yes," said the huntsman, "if you will go with me." Then the young
fellow went with him, apprenticed himself to him for some years, and
learnt the art of hunting.  After this he wished to try his luck
elsewhere, and the huntsman gave him nothing in the way of payment
but an air-gun, which had, however, this property, that it hit its
mark without fail whenever he shot with it.  Then he set out and
found himself in a very large forest, which he could not get to the
end of in one day.  When evening came he seated himself in a high
tree in order to escape from the wild beasts.

Towards midnight, it seemed to him as if a tiny little light
glimmered in the distance.  Then he looked down through the branches
towards it, and kept well in his mind where it was.  But in the first
place he took off his hat and threw it down in the direction of the
light, so that he might go to the hat as a mark when he had
descended.  He got down and went to his hat, put it on again and went
straight forwards.  The farther he went, the larger the light grew,
and when he got close to it he saw that it was an enormous fire, and
that three giants were sitting by it, who had an ox on the spit, and
were roasting it.  Presently one of them said, "I must just taste if
the meat will soon be fit to eat," and pulled a piece off, and was
about to put it in his mouth when the huntsman shot it out of his
hand.  "Well, really," said the giant, "if the wind has not blown the
bit out of my hand," and helped himself to another.  But when he was
just about to bite into it, the huntsman again shot it away from him.
On this the giant gave the one who was sitting next him a box on the
ear, and cried angrily, "Why are you snatching my piece away from
me?" "I have not snatched it away," said the other, "a sharpshooter
must have shot it away from you."

The giant took another piece, but again could not keep it in his
hand, for the huntsman shot it out.  Then the giant said, "That must
be a good shot to shoot the bit out of one's very mouth, such an one
would be useful to us." And he cried aloud, "Come here, you
sharpshooter, seat yourself at the fire beside us and eat your fill,
we will not hurt you, but if you will not come, and we have to bring
you by force, you are a lost man."

On this the youth went up to them and told them he was a skilled
huntsman, and that whatever he aimed at with his gun, he was certain
to hit.  Then they said if he would go with them he should be well
treated, and they told him that outside the forest there was a great
lake, behind which stood a tower, and in the tower was imprisoned a
lovely princess, whom they wished very much to carry off.  "Yes,"
said he, "I will soon get her for you." Then they added, "But there
is still something else, there is a tiny little dog, which begins to
bark directly any one goes near, and as soon as it barks every one in
the royal palace wakens up, and for this reason we cannot get there,
can you undertake to shoot it dead?" "Yes," said he, "that will be
quite fun for me." After this he got into a boat and rowed over the
lake, and as soon as he landed, the little dog came running out, and
was about to bark, but the huntsman took his airgun and shot it dead.

When the giants saw that, they rejoiced, and thought they already had
the king's daughter safe, but the huntsman wished first to see how
matters stood, and told them that they must stay outside until he
called them.  Then he went into the castle, and all was perfectly
quiet within, and every one was asleep.  When he opened the door of
the first room, a sword was hanging on the wall which was made of
pure silver, and there was a golden star on it, and the name of the
king, and on a table near it lay a sealed letter which he broke open,
and inside it was written that whosoever had the sword could kill
everything which opposed him.  So he took the sword from the wall,
hung it at his side and went onwards, then he entered the room where
the king's daughter was lying sleeping, and she was so beautiful that
he stood still and, holding his breath, looked at her.  He thought to
himself, "How can I give an innocent maiden into the power of the
wild giants, who have evil in their minds?" He looked about further,
and under the bed stood a pair of slippers, on the right one was her
father's name with a star, and on the left her own name with a star.
She wore also a large scarf of silk embroidered with gold, and on the
right side was her father's name, and on the left her own, all in
golden letters.  Then the huntsman took a pair of scissors and cut
the right corner off, and put it in his knapsack, and then he also
took the right slipper with the king's name, and thrust that in.  Now
the maiden still lay sleeping, and she was quite sewn into her
night-dress, and he cut a morsel from this also, and thrust it in
with the rest, but he did all without touching her.

Then he went forth and left her lying asleep undisturbed, and when he
came to the gate again, the giants were still standing outside
waiting for him, and expecting that he was bringing the princess.
But he cried to them that they were to come in, for the maiden was
already in their power, that he could not open the gate to them, but
there was a hole through which they must creep.  Then the first
approached, and the huntsman wound the giant's hair round his hand,
pulled the head in, and cut it off at one stroke with his sword, and
then drew the rest of him in.  He called to the second and cut his
head off likewise, and then he killed the third also, and he was well
pleased that he had freed the beautiful maiden from her enemies, and
he cut out their tongues and put them in his knapsack. Then thought
he, "I will go home to my father and let him see what I have already
done, and afterwards I will travel about the world, the luck which
God is pleased to grant me will easily find me."

But when the king in the castle awoke, he saw the three giants lying
there dead.  So he went into the sleeping-room of his daughter, awoke
her, and asked who could have killed the giants. Then said she, "Dear
father, I know not, I have been asleep." But when she arose and would
have put on her slippers, the right one was gone, and when she looked
at her scarf it was cut, and the right corner was missing, and when
she looked at her night-dress a piece was cut out of it.  The king
summoned his whole court together, soldiers and every one else who
was there, and asked who had set his daughter at liberty, and killed
the giants.

Now it happened that he had a captain, who was one-eyed and a hideous
man, and he said that he had done it.  Then the old king said that as
he had accomplished this, he should marry his daughter.  But the
maiden said, "Rather than marry him, dear father, I will go away into
the world as far as my legs can carry me." But the king said that if
she would not marry him she should take off her royal garments and
wear peasant's clothing, and go forth, and that she should go to a
potter, and begin a trade in earthen vessels.

So she put off her royal apparel, and went to a potter and borrowed
crockery enough for a stall, and she promised him also that if she
had sold it by the evening, she would pay for it. Then the king said
she was to seat herself in a corner with it and sell it, and he
arranged with some peasants to drive over it with their carts, so
that everything should be broken into a thousand pieces.  When
therefore the king's daughter had placed her stall in the street, by
came the carts, and broke all she had into tiny fragments.  She began
to weep and said, "Alas, how shall I ever pay for the pots now." The
king, however, had wished by this to force her to marry the captain;
but instead of that, she again went to the potter, and asked him if
he would lend to her once more.  He said, no, she must first pay for
what she already had.

Then she went to her father and cried and lamented, and said she
would go forth into the world.  Then said he, "I will have a little
hut built for you in the forest outside, and in it you shall stay all
your life long and cook for every one, but you shall take no money
for it." When the hut was ready, a sign was hung on the door whereon
was written, to-day given, to-morrow sold.  There she remained a long
time, and it was rumored about the world that a maiden was there who
cooked without asking for payment, and that this was set forth on a
sign outside her door.

The huntsman heard it likewise, and thought to himself, that would
suit you.  You are poor, and have no money.  So he took his air-gun
and his knapsack, wherein all the things which he had formerly
carried away with him from the castle as tokens of his truthfulness
were still lying, and went into the forest, and found the hut with
the sign, to-day given, to-morrow sold.  He had put on the sword with
which he had cut off the heads of the three giants, and thus entered
the hut, and ordered something to eat to be given to him.  He was
charmed with the beautiful maiden, who was indeed as lovely as any
picture.  She asked him whence he came and whither he was going, and
he said, "I am roaming about the world." Then she asked him where he
had got the sword, for that truly her father's name was on it.  He
asked her if she were the king's daughter.  "Yes," answered she.
"With this sword," said he, "did I cut off the heads of three
giants." And he took their tongues out of his knapsack in proof.
Then he also showed her the slipper, and the corner of the scarf, and
the piece of the night-dress.

Hereupon she was overjoyed, and said that he was the one who had
delivered her.  On this they went together to the old king, and
fetched him to the hut, and she led him into her room, and told him
that the huntsman was the man who had really set her free from the
giants.  And when the aged king saw all the proofs of this, he could
no longer doubt, and said that he was very glad he knew how
everything had happened, and that the huntsman should have her to
wife, on which the maiden was glad at heart.  Then she dressed the
huntsman as if he were a foreign lord, and the king ordered a feast
to be prepared.  When they went to table, the captain sat on the left
side of the king's daughter, but the huntsman was on the right, and
the captain thought he was a foreign lord who had come on a visit.
When they had eaten and drunk, the old king said to the captain that
he would set before him something which he must guess.  "Supposing
someone said that he had killed the three giants and he were asked
where the giants, tongues were, and he were forced to go and look,
and there were none in their heads.  How could that have happened?"
The captain said, "Then they cannot have had any." "Not so," said the
king.  "Every animal has a tongue," and then he likewise asked what
punishment should be meted out to anyone who made such an answer.
The captain replied, "He ought to be torn in pieces." Then the king
said he had pronounced his own sentence, and the captain was put in
prison and then torn in four pieces, but the king's daughter was
married to the huntsman. After this he brought his father and mother,
and they lived with their son in happiness, and after the death of
the old king he received the kingdom.
There was once upon a time a king who had a little boy in whose stars
it had been foretold that he should be killed by a stag when he was
sixteen years of age, and when he had reached that age the huntsmen
once went hunting with him.  In the forest, the king's son was
separated from the others, and all at once he saw a great stag which
he wanted to shoot, but could not hit.  At length he chased the stag
so far that they were quite out of the forest, and then suddenly a
great tall man was standing there instead of the stag, and said, "It
is well that I have you.  I have already ruined six pairs of glass
skates with running after you, and have not been able to reach you."

Then he took the king's son with him, and dragged him through a great
lake to a great palace, and he had to sit down to table with him and
eat something.  When they had eaten something together the king said,
"I have three daughters, you must keep watch over the eldest for one
night, from nine in the evening till six in the morning, and every
time the clock strikes, I will come myself and call, and if you then
give me no answer, to-morrow morning you shall be put to death, but
if you always give me an answer, you shall have her to wife."

When the young folks went to the bedroom there stood a stone image of
St. Christopher, and the king's daughter said to it, "My father will
come at nine o'clock, and every hour till it strikes three, when he
calls, give him an answer instead of the king's son." Then the stone
image of St. Christopher nodded its head quite quickly, and then more
and more slowly till at last it again stood still.  The next morning
the king said to him, "You have done the business well, but I cannot
give my daughter away. You must now watch a night by my second
daughter, and then I will consider with myself, whether you can have
my eldest daughter to wife, but I shall come every hour myself, and
when I call you, answer me, and if I call you and you do not reply,
your blood shall flow."

Then they both went into the sleeping-room, and there stood a still
larger stone image of St. Christopher, and the king's daughter said
to it, "If my father calls, answer him." Then the great stone image
of St. Christopher again nodded its head quite quickly and then more
and more slowly, until at last it stood still again.  And the king's
son lay down on the threshold, put his hand under his head and slept.
The next morning the king said to him, "You have done the business
really well, but I cannot give my daughter away, you must now watch a
night by the youngest princess, and then I will consider with myself
whether you can have my second daughter to wife.  But I shall come
every hour myself, and when I call you answer me, and if I call you
and you answer not, your blood shall flow for me."

Then they once more went to the sleeping-room together, and there was
a much greater and much taller image of St. Christopher than the two
first had been.  The king's daughter said to it, "When my father
calls, answer." Then the great tall stone image of St. Christopher
nodded quite half an hour with its head, until at length the head
stood still again.  And the king's son laid himself down on the
threshold of the door and slept.  The next morning the king said,
"You have indeed watched well, but I cannot give you my daughter now,
I have a great forest, if you cut it down for me between six o'clock
this morning and six at night, I will think about it."

Then he gave him a glass axe, a glass wedge, and a glass mallet.
When he got into the wood, he began at once to cut, but the axe broke
in two.  Then he took the wedge, and struck it once with the mallet,
and it became as short and as small as sand.  Then he was much
troubled and believed he would have to die, and sat down and wept.

Now when it was noon the king said, "One of you girls must take him
something to eat." "No," said the two eldest, "we will not take it to
him, the one by whom he last watched, can take him something." Then
the youngest was forced to go and take him something to eat.  When
she got into the forest, she asked him how he was getting on.  "Oh,"
said he, "I am getting on very badly." Then she said he was to come
and just eat a little. "Nay," said he, "I cannot do that, I have to
die anyway, so I will eat no more." Then she spoke so kindly to him
and begged him just to try, that he came and ate something.  When he
had eaten something she said, "I will pick your lice a while, and
then you will feel happier."

So she loused him, and he became weary and fell asleep, and then she
took her handkerchief and made a knot in it, and struck it three
times on the earth, and said, "Earth-workers, come forth." In a
moment, numbers of little earth-men came forth, and asked what the
king's daughter commanded.  Then said she, "In three hours, time the
great forest must be cut down, and all the wood laid in heaps." So
the little earth-men went about and got together the whole of their
kindred to help them with the work. They began at once, and when the
three hours were over, all was done, and they came back to the king's
daughter and told her so.  Then she took her white handkerchief again
and said, "Earth-workers, go home." At this they all disappeared.

When the king's son awoke, he was delighted, and she said, "Come home
when it has struck six o'clock." He did as she told him, and then the
king asked, "Have you made away with the forest?" "Yes," said the
king's son.  When they were sitting at table, the king said, "I
cannot yet give you my daughter to wife, you must still do something
more for her sake." So he asked what it was to be.  "I have a great
fish-pond," said the king.  "You must go to it to-morrow morning and
clear it of all mud until it is as bright as a mirror, and fill it
with every kind of fish."

The next morning the king gave him a glass shovel and said, "The
fish-pond must be done by six o'clock." So he went away, and when he
came to the fish-pond he stuck his shovel in the mud and it broke in
two.  Then he stuck his hoe in the mud, and it broke also.  Then he
was much troubled.  At noon the youngest daughter brought him
something to eat, and asked him how he was getting on.  So the king's
son said everything was going very ill with him, and he would
certainly have to lose his head.  "My tools have broken to pieces
again." "Oh," said she, "you must just come and eat something, and
then you will be in another frame of mind." "No," said he, "I cannot
eat, I am far too unhappy for that." Then she gave him many good
words until at last he came and ate something.

Then she loused him again, and he fell asleep, so once more she took
her handkerchief, tied a knot in it, and struck the ground thrice
with the knot, and said, "Earth-workers, come forth." In a moment a
great many little earth-men came and asked what she desired, and she
told them that in three hours, time, they must have the fish-pond
entirely cleaned out, and it must be so clear that people could see
themselves reflected in it, and every kind of fish must be in it.
The little earth-men went away and summoned all their kindred to help
them, and in two hours it was done.  Then they returned to her and
said, "We have done as you have commanded." The king's daughter took
the handkerchief and once more struck thrice on the ground with it,
and said, "earth-workers, go home again." Then they all went away.

When the king's son awoke the fish-pond was done.  Then the king's
daughter went away also, and told him that when it was six he was to
come to the house.  When he arrived at the house the king asked,
"Have you got the fish-pond done?" "Yes," said the king's son.  That
was very good.

When they were again sitting at table the king said, "You have
certainly done the fish-pond, but I cannot give you my daughter yet,
you must just do one thing more." "What is that, then?" asked the
king's son.  The king said he had a great mountain on which there was
nothing but briars which must all be cut down, and at the top of it
the youth must build a great castle, which must be as strong as could
be conceived, and all the furniture and fittings belonging to a
castle must be inside it.

And when he arose next morning the king gave him a glass axe and a
glass gimlet, and he was to have all done by six o'clock.  As he was
cutting down the first briar with the axe, it broke off short, and so
small that the pieces flew all round about, and he could not use the
gimlet either.  Then he was quite miserable, and waited for his
dearest to see if she would not come and help him in his need.  When
it was mid-day she came and brought him something to eat.  He went to
meet her and told her all, and ate something, and let her louse him
and fell asleep.

Then she once more took the knot and struck the earth with it, and
said, "Earth-workers, come forth." Then came once again numbers of
earth-men, and asked what her desire was.  Then said she, "In the
space of three hours you must cut down the whole of the briars, and a
castle must be built on the top of the mountain that must be as
strong as any one could conceive, and all the furniture that pertains
to a castle must be inside it." They went away, and summoned their
kindred to help them and when the time was come, all was ready.  Then
they came to the king's daughter and told her so, and the king's
daughter took her handkerchief and struck thrice on the earth with
it, and said, "Earth-workers, go home, on which they all
disappeared." When therefore the king's son awoke and saw everything
done, he was as happy as a bird in air.

When it had struck six, they went home together.  Then said the king,
"Is the castle ready?" "Yes," said the king's son.  When they sat
down to table, the king said, "I cannot give away my youngest
daughter until the two eldest are married." Then the king's son and
the king's daughter were quite troubled, and the king's son had no
idea what to do.  But he went by night to the king's daughter and ran
away with her.  When they had got a little distance away, the king's
daughter peeped round and saw her father behind her.  "Oh," said she,
"what are we to do? My father is behind us, and will take us back
with him.  I will at once change you into a briar, and myself into a
rose, and I will shelter myself in the midst of the bush."

When the father reached the place, there stood a briar with one rose
on it, and he was about to gather the rose, when the thorn pricked
his finger so that he was forced to go home again.  His wife asked
why he had not brought their daughter back with him.  So he said he
had nearly got up to her, but that all at once he had lost sight of
her, and a briar with one rose was growing on the spot. Then said the
queen, "If you had but gathered the rose, the briar would have been
forced to come too." So he went back again to fetch the rose, but in
the meantime the two were already far over the plain, and the king
ran after them.  Then the daughter once more looked round and saw her
father coming, and said, "Oh, what shall we do now?  I will instantly
change you into a church and myself into a priest, and I will stand
up in the pulpit, and preach." When the king got to the place, there
stood a church, and in the pulpit was a priest preaching.  So he
listened to the sermon, and then went home again.

Then the queen asked why he had not brought their daughter with him,
and he said, "Nay, I ran a long time after her, and just as I thought
I should soon overtake her, a church was standing there and a priest
was in the pulpit preaching." "You should just have brought the
priest," said his wife, "and then the church would soon have come.
It is no use to send you, I must go there myself." When she had
walked for some time, and could see the two in the distance, the
king's daughter peeped round and saw her mother coming, and said,
"Now we are undone, for my mother is coming herself, I will
immediately change you into a fish-pond and myself into a fish."

When the mother came to the place, there was a large fish-pond, and
in the midst of it a fish was leaping about and peeping out of the
water, and it was quite merry.  She wanted to catch the fish, but she
could not.  Then she was very angry, and drank up the whole pond in
order to catch the fish, but it made her so ill that she was forced
to vomit, and vomited the whole pond out again.  Then she cried, "I
see very well that nothing can be done now, and asked them to come
back to her." Then the king's daughter went back again, and the queen
gave her daughter three walnuts, and said, "With these you can help
yourself when you are in your greatest need."

So the young folks once more went away together.  And when they had
walked quite ten miles, they arrived at the castle from whence the
king's son came, and near it was a village.  When they reached it,
the king's son said, "Stay here, my dearest, I will just go to the
castle, and then will I come with a carriage and with attendants to
fetch you."

When he got to the castle they all rejoiced greatly at having the
king's son back again, and he told them he had a bride who was now in
the village, and they must go with the carriage to fetch her.  Then
they harnessed the horses at once, and many attendants seated
themselves outside the carriage.  When the king's son was about to
get in, his mother gave him a kiss, and he forgot everything which
had happened, and also what he was about to do. At this his mother
ordered the horses to be taken out of the carriage again, and
everyone went back into the house.  But the maiden sat in the village
and watched and watched, and thought he would come and fetch her, but
no one came.  Then the king's daughter took service in the mill which
belonged to the castle, and was obliged to sit by the pond every
afternoon and clean the tubs.

And the queen came one day on foot from the castle, and went walking
by the pond, and saw the well-grown maiden sitting there, and said,
"What a fine strong girl that is.  She pleases me well." Then she and
all with her looked at the maid, but no one knew her.  So a long time
passed by during which the maiden served the miller honorably and
faithfully.  In the meantime, the queen had sought a wife for her
son, who came from quite a distant part of the world.  When the bride
came, they were at once to be married.  And many people hurried
together, all of whom wanted to see everything.  Then the girl said
to the miller that he might be so good as to give her leave to go
also.  So the miller said, "Yes, do go there." When she was about to
go, she opened one of the three walnuts, and a beautiful dress lay
inside it. She put it on, and went into the church and stood by the
altar. Suddenly came the bride and bridegroom, and seated themselves
before the altar, and when the priest was just going to bless them,
the bride peeped half round and saw the maiden standing there.  Then
she stood up again, and said she would not be given away until she
also had as beautiful a dress as that lady there.

So they went back to the house again, and sent to ask the lady if she
would sell that dress.  No, she would not sell it, but the bride
might perhaps earn it.  Then the bride asked her how she was to do
this.  Then the maiden said if she might sleep one night outside the
king's son's door, the bride might have what she wanted.  So the
bride said, "Yes," she was willing to do that.  But the servants were
ordered to give the king's son a sleeping draught, and then the
maiden laid herself down on the threshold and lamented all night
long.  She had had the forest cut down for him, she had had the
fish-pond cleaned out for him, she had had the castle built for him,
she had changed him into a briar, and then into a church, and at last
into a fish-pond, and yet he had forgotten her so quickly.

The king's son did not hear one word of it, but the servants had been
awakened, and had listened to it, and had not known what it could
mean.  The next morning when they were all up, the bride put on the
dress, and went away to the church with the bridegroom.  In the
meantime the maiden opened the second walnut, and a still more
beautiful dress was inside it.  She put it on, and went and stood by
the altar in the church, and everything happened as it had happened
the time before.  And the maiden again lay all night on the threshold
which led to the chamber of the king's son, and the servant was once
more to give him a sleeping draught.  The servant, however, went to
him and gave him something to keep him awake, and then the king's son
went to bed, and the miller's maiden bemoaned herself as before on
the threshold of the door, and told of all that she had done.  All
this the king's son heard, and was sore troubled, and what was past
came back to him.  Then he wanted to go to her, but his mother had
locked the door.

The next morning, however, he went at once to his beloved, and told
her everything which had happened to him, and prayed her not to be
angry with him for having forgotten her.  Then the king's daughter
opened the third walnut, and within it was a still more magnificent
dress, which she put on, and went with her bridegroom to church, and
numbers of children came who gave them flowers, and offered them gay
ribbons to bind about their feet, and they were blessed by the
priest, and had a merry wedding.  But the false mother and the bride
had to depart.  And the mouth of the person who last told all this is
still warm.
There was once upon a time a princess who was extremely proud. If a
wooer came she gave him some riddle to guess, and if he could not
guess it, he was sent contemptuously away.  She let it be made known
also that whosoever solved her riddle should marry her, let him be
who he might.  At length, three tailors fell in with each other, the
two eldest of whom thought they had done so many dexterous jobs of
work successfully that they could not fail to succeed in this also,
the third was a little, useless harum-scarum, who did not even know
his trade, but thought he must have some luck in this venture, for
where else was it to come from.  Then the two others said to him,
just stay at home, you cannot do much with your little understanding.
The little tailor, however, did not let himself be discouraged, and
said he had set his mind to work on this for once, and he would
manage well enough, and he went forth as if the whole world were his.

They all three announced themselves to the princess, and said she was
to propound her riddle to them, and that the right persons were now
come, who had understandings so fine that they could be threaded in a
needle.  Then said the princess, "I have two kinds of hair on my
head, of what color is it." "If that be all," said the first, "it
must be black and white, like the cloth which is called pepper and
salt." The princess said, "Wrongly guessed, let the second answer."
Then said the second, "If it be not black and white, then it is brown
and red, like my father's sunday coat." "Wrongly guessed," said the
princess, "let the third give the answer for I see very well he knows
it for certain." Then the little tailor stepped boldly forth and
said, "The princess has a silver and a golden hair on her head, and
those are the two different colors."

When the princess heard that, she turned pale and nearly fell down
with terror, for the little tailor had guessed her riddle, and she
had firmly believed that no man on earth could discover it.  When her
courage returned she said, "You have not won me yet by that.  There
is still something else that you must do.  Below, in the stable is a
bear with which you shall pass the night, and when I get up in the
morning if you are still alive, you shall marry me." She expected,
however, she would thus get rid of the tailor, for the bear had never
yet left anyone alive who had fallen into his clutches.  The little
tailor did not let himself be frightened away, but was quite
delighted, and said, "Boldly ventured is half won."

So when the evening came, our little tailor was taken down to the
bear.  The bear was about to set on the little fellow at once, and
give him a hearty welcome with his paws.  "Softly, softly," said the
little tailor, "I will soon make you quiet." Then quite composedly,
and as if he had no anxiety in the world, he took some nuts out of
his pocket, cracked them, and ate the kernels.  When the bear saw
that, he was seized with a desire to have some nuts too.  The tailor
felt in his pockets, and reached him a handful, they were, however,
not nuts, but pebbles.  The bear put them in his mouth, but could get
nothing out of them, let him bite as he would.  "Eh," thought he,
"what a stupid blockhead am I, I cannot even crack a nut." And then
he said to the tailor, "Here, crack me the nuts." "There, see what a
stupid fellow you are," said the little tailor, "to have such a great
mouth, and not be able to crack a small nut." Then he took the pebble
and nimbly put a nut in his mouth in the place of it, and crack, it
was in two.  "I must try the thing again," said the bear, "when I
watch you, I then think I ought to be able to do it too." So the
tailor once more gave him a pebble, and the bear tried and tried to
bite into it with all the strength of his body.  But even you do not
believe that he managed it.

When that was over, the tailor took out a violin from beneath his
coat, and played something to himself.  When the bear heard the
music, he could not help beginning to dance, and when he had danced a
while, the thing pleased him so well that he said to the little
tailor, "Listen, is it difficult to fiddle?" "Easy enough for a
child.  Look, with the left hand I lay my fingers on it, and with the
right I stroke it with the bow, and then it goes merrily, hop sa sa
vivallalera." "So," said the bear, "fiddling is a thing I should like
to learn too, that I might dance whenever I felt like it.  What do
you think of that?  Will you give me lessons?" "With all my heart,"
said the tailor, "if you have a talent for it.  But just let me see
your claws, they are terribly long, I must cut your nails a little."
Then a vise was brought, and the bear put his claws in it, and the
little tailor screwed it tight, and said, "Now wait until I come with
the scissors." And he let the bear growl as he liked, and lay down in
the corner on a bundle of straw, and fell asleep.

When the princess heard the bear growling so fiercely during the
night, she believed nothing else but that he was growling for joy,
and had made an end of the tailor.  In the morning she arose careless
and happy, but when she peeped into the stable, the tailor stood
gaily before her, and was as healthy as a fish in water.  Now she
could not say another word against the wedding because she had given
a promise before everyone, and the king ordered a carriage to be
brought in which she was to drive to church with the tailor, and
there she was to be married.

When they had climbed into the carriage, the two other tailors, who
had false hearts and envied him his good fortune, went into the
stable and unscrewed the bear again.  The bear in great fury ran
after the carriage.  The princess heard snorting and growling.  She
was terrified, and she cried, "Ah, the bear is behind us and wants to
get you." The tailor was quick and stood on his head, stuck his legs
out of the window, and cried, "Do you see the vise?  If you do not be
off you shall be put into it again." When the bear saw that, he
turned round and ran away.  The tailor drove quietly to church, and
the princess was married to him at once, and he lived with her as
happy as a woodlark.  Whosoever does not believe this, must pay a
taler.
A tailor's apprentice was traveling about the world in search of
work, and at one time he could find none, and his poverty was so
great that he had not a farthing to live on.  Presently he met a Jew
on the road, and as he thought he would have a great deal of money
about him, the tailor thrust God out of his heart, fell on the Jew,
and said, give me your money, or I will strike you dead.  Then said
the Jew, grant me my life, I have no money but eight farthings.  But
the tailor said, money you have, and it shall be produced, and used
violence and beat him until he was near death.  And when the Jew was
dying, the last words he said were, the bright sun will bring it to
light, and thereupon he died.  The tailor's apprentice felt in his
pockets and sought for money, but he found nothing but eight
farthings, as the Jew had said.  Then he took him up and carried him
behind a clump of trees, and went onwards to seek work.  After he had
traveled about a long while, he found work in a town with a master
who had a pretty daughter, with whom he fell in love, and he married
her, and lived in good and happy wedlock.

After a long time when he and his wife had two children, the wife's
father and mother died, and the young people kept house alone.  One
morning, when the husband was sitting on the table before the window,
his wife brought him his coffee, and when he had poured it out into
the saucer, and was just going to drink, the sun shone on it and the
reflection gleamed hither and thither on the wall above, and made
circles on it.  Then the tailor looked up and said, yes, it would
like very much to bring it to light, and cannot.  The woman said, o,
dear husband, and what is that, then.  What do you mean by that.  He
answered, I must not tell you.  But she said, if you love me, you
must tell me, and used her most affectionate words, and said that no
one should ever know it, and left him no rest.  Then he told her how
years ago, when he was traveling about seeking work and quite worn
out and penniless, he had killed a Jew, and that in the last agonies
of death, the Jew had spoken the words, the bright sun will bring it
to light.  And now, the sun had just wanted to bring it to light, and
had gleamed and made circles on the wall, but had not been able to do
it.  After this, he again charged her particularly never to tell
this, or he would lose his life, and she did promise.  However, when
he had sat down to work again, she went to her great friend and
confided the story to her, and asked her never to repeat it to any
human being, but before three days were over, the whole town knew it,
and the tailor was brought to trial, and condemned.  And thus, after
all, the bright sun did bring it to light.
There was once on a time a soldier who for many years had served the
king faithfully, but when the war came to an end could serve no
longer because of the many wounds which he had received.  The king
said to him, "You may return to your home, I need you no longer, and
you will not receive any more money, for he only receives wages who
renders me serve for them." Then the soldier did not know how to earn
a living, went away greatly troubled, and walked the whole day, until
in the evening he entered a forest.  When darkness came on, he saw a
light, which he went up to, and came to a house wherein lived a
witch.  "Do give me one night's lodging, and a little to eat and
drink," said he to her, "or I shall starve." "Oho," she answered,
"who gives anything to a run-away soldier?  Yet will I be
compassionate, and take you in, if you will do what I wish." "What do
you wish?" said the soldier.  "That you should dig all round my
garden for me, tomorrow." The soldier consented, and next day labored
with all his strength, but could not finish it by the evening.  "I
see well enough," said the witch, "that you can do no more today, but
I will keep you yet another night, in payment for which you must
tomorrow chop me a load of wood, and chop it small." The soldier
spent the whole day in doing it, and in the evening the witch
proposed that he should stay one night more.  "Tomorrow, you shall
only do me a very trifling piece of work.  Behind my house, there is
an old dry well, into which my light has fallen, it burns blue, and
never goes out, and you shall bring it up again."

Next day the old woman took him to the well, and let him down in a
basket.  He found the blue light, and made her a signal to draw him
up again.  She did draw him up, but when he came near the edge, she
stretched down her hand and wanted to take the blue light away from
him.  "No," said he, perceiving her evil intention, "I will not give
you the light until I am standing with both feet upon the ground."
The witch fell into a passion, let him fall again into the well, and
went away.

The poor soldier fell without injury on the moist ground, and the
blue light went on burning, but of what use was that to him.  He saw
very well that he could not escape death.  He sat for a while very
sorrowfully, then suddenly he felt in his pocket and found his
tobacco pipe, which was still half full.  "This shall be my last
pleasure," thought he, pulled it out, lit it at the blue light and
began to smoke.  When the smoke had circled about the cavern,
suddenly a little black dwarf stood before him, and said, "Lord, what
are your commands?" "What my commands are?" replied the soldier,
quite astonished.  "I must do everything you bid me," said the little
man. "Good," said the soldier, "then in the first place help me out
of this well." The little man took him by the hand, and led him
through an underground passage, but he did not forget to take the
blue light with him.  On the way the dwarf showed him the treasures
which the witch had collected and hidden there, and the soldier took
as much gold as he could carry.  When he was above, he said to the
little man, "Now go and bind the old witch, and carry her before the
judge."

In a short time she came by like the wind, riding on a wild tom-cat
and screaming frightfully.  Nor was it long before the little man
re-appeared.  "It is all done," said he, "and the witch is already
hanging on the gallows.  What further commands has my lord," inquired
the dwarf.  "At this moment, none," answered the soldier, "You can
return home, only be at hand immediately, if I summon you." "Nothing
more is needed than that you should light your pipe at the blue
light, and I will appear before you at once." Thereupon he vanished
from his sight.

The soldier returned to the town from which he had come.  He went to
the best inn, ordered himself handsome clothes, and then bade the
landlord furnish him a room as handsome as possible. When it was
ready and the soldier had taken possession of it, he summoned the
little black mannikin and said, "I have served the king faithfully,
but he has dismissed me, and left me to hunger, and now I want to
take my revenge." "What am I to do?" asked the little man.  "Late at
night, when the king's daughter is in bed, bring her here in her
sleep, she shall do servant's work for me." The mannikin said, "That
is an easy thing for me to do, but a very dangerous thing for you,
for if it is discovered, you will fare ill." When twelve o'clock had
struck, the door sprang open, and the mannikin carried in the
princess.  "Aha, are you there?" cried the soldier, "Get to your work
at once.  Fetch the broom and sweep the chamber." When she had done
this, he ordered her to come to his chair, and then he stretched out
his feet and said, "Pull off my boots," and then he threw them in her
face, and made her pick them up again, and clean and brighten them.
She, however, did everything he bade her, without opposition,
silently and with half-shut eyes.  When the first cock crowed, the
mannikin carried her back to the royal palace, and laid her in her
bed.

Next morning when the princess arose she went to her father, and told
him that she had had a very strange dream.  "I was carried through
the streets with the rapidity of lightning," said she, "and taken
into a soldier's room, and I had to wait upon him like a servant,
sweep his room, clean his boots, and do all kinds of menial work.  It
was only a dream, and yet I am just as tired as if I really had done
everything." "The dream may have been true," said the king, "I will
give you a piece of advice.  Fill your pocket full of peas, and make
a small hole in the pocket, and then if you are carried away again,
they will fall out and leave a track in the streets." But unseen by
the king, the mannikin was standing beside him when he said that, and
heard all.  At night when the sleeping princess was again carried
through the streets, some peas certainly did fall out of her pocket,
but they made no track, for the crafty mannikin had just before
scattered peas in every street there was.  And again the princess was
compelled to do servant's work until cock-crow.

Next morning the king sent his people out to seek the track, but it
was all in vain, for in every street poor children were sitting,
picking up peas, and saying, "It must have rained peas, last night."
"We must think of something else," said the king, "keep your shoes on
when you go to bed, and before you come back from the place where you
are taken, hide one of them there, I will soon contrive to find it."
The black mannikin heard this plot, and at night when the soldier
again ordered him to bring the princess, revealed it to him, and told
him that he knew of no expedient to counteract this stratagem, and
that if the shoe were found in the soldier's house it would go badly
with him.  "Do what I bid you," replied the soldier, and again this
third night the princess was obliged to work like a servant, but
before she went away, she hid her shoe under the bed.

Next morning the king had the entire town searched for his daughter's
shoe.  It was found at the soldier's, and the soldier himself, who at
the entreaty of the dwarf had gone outside the gate, was soon brought
back, and thrown into prison.  In his flight he had forgotten the
most valuable things he had, the blue light and the gold, and had
only one ducat in his pocket. And now loaded with chains, he was
standing at the window of his dungeon, when he chanced to see one of
his comrades passing by.  The soldier tapped at the pane of glass,
and when this man came up, said to him, "Be so kind as to fetch me
that small bundle I have lying in the inn, and I will give you a
ducat for doing it."

His comrade ran thither and brought him what he wanted.  As soon as
the soldier was alone again, he lighted his pipe and summoned the
black mannikin.  "Have no fear," said the latter to his master.  "Go
wheresoever they take you, and let them do what they will, only take
the blue light with you." Next day the soldier was tried, and though
he had done nothing wicked, the judge condemned him to death.  When
he was led forth to die, he begged a last favor of the king.  "What
is it?" asked the king.  "That I may smoke one more pipe on my way."
"You may smoke three," answered the king, "but do not imagine that I
will spare your life." Then the soldier pulled out his pipe and
lighted it at the blue light, and as soon as a few wreaths of smoke
had ascended, the mannikin was there with a small cudgel in his hand,
and said, "What does my lord command?" "Strike down to earth that
false judge there, and his constable, and spare not the king who has
treated me so ill." Then the mannikin fell on them like lightning,
darting this way and that way, and whosoever was so much as touched
by his cudgel fell to earth, and did not venture to stir again.  The
king was terrified, he threw himself on the soldier's mercy, and
merely to be allowed to live at all, gave him his kingdom for his
own, and his daughter to wife.
Once upon a time there was a child who was willful, and would not do
what her mother wished.  For this reason God had no pleasure in her,
and let her become ill, and no doctor could do her any good, and in a
short time she lay on her death-bed. When she had been lowered into
her grave, and the earth was spread over her, all at once her arm
came out again, and stretched upwards, and when they had put it in
and spread fresh earth over it, it was all to no purpose, for the arm
always came out again.  Then the mother herself was obliged to go to
the grave, and strike the arm with a rod, and when she had done that,
it was drawn in, and then at last the child had rest beneath the
ground.
There was once a king's son, who was no longer content to stay at
home in his father's house, and as he had no fear of anything, he
thought, I will go forth into the wide world, there the time will not
seem long to me, and I shall see wonders enough.  So he took leave of
his parents, and went forth, and on and on from morning till night,
and whichever way his path led it was the same to him.  It came to
pass that he arrived at the house of a giant, and as he was so tired
he sat down by the door and rested. And as he let his eyes roam here
and there, he saw the giant's playthings lying in the yard.  These
were a couple of enormous balls, and nine-pins as tall as a man.
After a while he had a fancy to set the nine-pins up and then rolled
the balls at them, and screamed and cried out when the nine-pins
fell, and had a merry time of it.

The giant heard the noise, stretched his head out of the window, and
saw a man who was not taller than other men, and yet played with his
nine-pins.  "Little worm," cried he, "why are you playing with my
balls?  Who gave you strength to do it?" The king's son looked up,
saw the giant, and said, "Oh, you blockhead, you think indeed that
you only have strong arms, I can do everything I want to do." The
giant came down and watched the bowling with great admiration, and
said, "Child of man, if you are one of that kind, go and bring me an
apple of the tree of life." "What do you want with it?" said the
king's son.  "I do not want the apple for myself," answered the
giant, "but I have a betrothed bride who wishes for it.  I have
traveled far about the world and cannot find the tree." "I will soon
find it," said the king's son, "and I do not know what is to prevent
me from getting the apple down." The giant said, "You really believe
it to be so easy.  The garden in which the tree stands is surrounded
by an iron railing, and in front of the railing lie wild beasts, each
close to the other, and they keep watch and let no man go in." "They
will be sure to let me in," said the king's son.  "Yes, but even if
you do get into the garden, and see the apple hanging to the tree, it
is still not yours.  A ring hangs in front of it, through which any
one who wants to reach the apple and break it off, must put his hand,
and no one has yet had the luck to do it." "That luck will be mine,"
said the king's son. Then he took leave of the giant, and went forth
over mountain and valley, and through plains and forests, until at
length he came to the wondrous garden.

The beasts lay round about it, but they had put their heads down and
were asleep.  Moreover, they did not awake when he went up to them,
so he stepped over them, climbed the fence, and got safely into the
garden.  There, in the very middle of it, stood the tree of life, and
the red apples were shining upon the branches.  He climbed up the
trunk to the top, and as he was about to reach out for an apple, he
saw a ring hanging before it, but he thrust his hand through that
without any difficulty, and picked the apple.  The ring closed
tightly on his arm, and all at once he felt a prodigious strength
flowing through his veins.  When he had come down again from the tree
with the apple, he would not climb over the fence, but grasped the
great gate, and had no need to shake it more than once before it
sprang open with a loud crash.  Then he went out, and the lion which
had been lying in front of the gate, was awake and sprang after him,
not in rage and fierceness, but following him humbly as its master.

The king's son took the giant the apple he had promised him, and
said, "You see, I have brought it without difficulty." The giant was
glad that his desire had been so soon satisfied, hastened to his
bride, and gave her the apple for which she had wished.  She was a
beautiful and wise maiden, and as she did not see the ring on his
arm, she said, "I shall never believe that you have brought the
apple, until I see the ring on your arm." The giant said, "I have
nothing to do but go home and fetch it," and thought it would be easy
to take away by force from the weak man, what he would not give of
his own free will.  He therefore demanded the ring from him, but the
king's son refused it.  "Where the apple is, the ring must be also,"
said the giant. "If you will not give it of your own accord, you must
fight me for it."

They wrestled with each other for a long time, but the giant could
not harm the king's son, who was strengthened by the magical power of
the ring.  Then the giant thought of a ruse, and said, "I have got
warm with fighting, and so have you.  We will bathe in the river, and
cool ourselves before we begin again." The king's son, who knew
nothing of falsehood, went with him to the water, and pulled off with
his clothes the ring also from his arm, and sprang into the river.
The giant instantly snatched the ring, and ran away with it, but the
lion, which had observed the theft, pursued the giant, tore the ring
out of his hand, and brought it back to its master.  Then the giant
placed himself behind an oak-tree, and while the king's son was busy
putting on his clothes again, surprised him, and put both his eyes
out.

And now the unhappy king's son stood there, and was blind and knew
not how to help himself.  Then the giant came back to him, took him
by the hand as if he were someone who wanted to guide him, and led
him to the top of a high rock.  There he left him standing, and
thought, "Just two steps more, and he will fall down and kill
himself, and I can take the ring from him." But the faithful lion had
not deserted its master.  It held him fast by the clothes, and drew
him gradually back again.

When the giant came and wanted to rob the dead man, he saw that his
cunning had been in vain.  "Is there no way, then, of destroying a
weak child of man like that?" said he angrily to himself, and seized
the king's son and led him back again to the precipice by another
way, but the lion which saw his evil design, helped its master out of
danger here also.  When they had come close to the edge, the giant
let the blind man's hand drop, and was going to leave him behind
alone, but the lion pushed the giant so that he was thrown down and
fell, dashed to pieces, on the ground.

The faithful animal again drew its master back from the precipice,
and guided him to a tree by which flowed a clear brook.  The king's
son sat down there, but the lion lay down, and sprinkled the water in
his face with its paws.  Scarcely had a couple of drops wetted the
sockets of his eyes, than he was once more able to see something, and
noticed a little bird flying quite close by, which hit itself against
the trunk of a tree.  So it went down to the water and bathed itself
therein, and then it soared upwards and swept between the trees
without touching them, as if it had recovered its sight.  Then the
king's son recognized a sign from God and stooped down to the water,
and washed and bathed his face in it.  And when he arose he had his
eyes once more, brighter and clearer than they had ever been.

The king's son thanked God for his great mercy, and traveled with his
lion onwards through the world.  And it came to pass that he arrived
before a castle which was enchanted.  In the gateway stood a maiden
of beautiful form and fine face, but she was quite black.  She spoke
to him and said, "Ah, if you could but deliver me from the evil spell
which is thrown over me." "What shall I do?" said the king's son.
The maiden answered, "You must pass three nights in the great hall of
this enchanted castle, but you must let no fear enter your heart.
When they are doing their worst to torment you, if you bear it
without letting a sound escape you, I shall be free.  Your life they
dare not take." Then said the king's son, "I have no fear, with God's
help I will try it." So he went gaily into the castle, and when it
grew dark he seated himself in the large hall and waited.

Everything was quiet, however, till midnight, when all at once a
great tumult began, and out of every hole and corner came little
devils.  They behaved as if they did not see him, seated themselves
in the middle of the room, lighted a fire, and began to gamble.  When
one of them lost, he said, "It is not right, some one is here who
does not belong to us, it is his fault that I am losing." "Wait, you
fellow behind the stove, I am coming," said another.  The screaming
became still louder, so that no one could have heard it without
terror.  The king's son stayed sitting quite calmly, and was not
afraid, but at last the devils jumped up from the ground, and fell on
him, and there were so many of them that he could not defend himself
from them.  They dragged him about on the floor, pinched him, pricked
him, beat him, and tormented him, but no sound escaped from him.
Towards morning they disappeared, and he was so exhausted that he
could scarcely move his limbs, but when day dawned the black maiden
came to him.  She bore in her hand a little bottle wherein was the
water of life wherewith she washed him, and he at once felt all pain
depart and new strength flow through his veins.  She said, "You have
held out successfully for one night, but two more lie before you."
Then she went away again, and as she was going, he observed that her
feet had become white.

The next night the devils came and began their gambling anew.  They
fell on the king's son, and beat him much more severely than the
night before, until his body was covered with wounds.  But as he bore
all quietly, they were forced to leave him, and when dawn appeared,
the maiden came and healed him with the water of life.  And when she
went away, he saw with joy that she had already become white to the
tips of her fingers.  And now he had only one night more to go
through, but it was the worst. The devils came again, "Are you still
there?" cried they. "You shall be tormented till your breath stops."
They pricked him and beat him, and threw him here and there, and
pulled him by the arms and legs as if they wanted to tear him to
pieces, but he bore everything, and never uttered a cry.  At last the
devils vanished, but he lay fainting there, and did not stir, nor
could he raise his eyes to look at the maiden who came in, and
sprinkled and bathed him with the water of life.  But suddenly he was
freed from all pain, and felt fresh and healthy as if he had awakened
from sleep, and when he opened his eyes he saw the maiden standing by
him, snow-white, and fair as day.

"Rise," said she, "and swing your sword three times over the stairs,
and then all will be delivered." And when he had done that, the whole
castle was released from enchantment, and the maiden was a rich
king's daughter.  The servants came and said that the table was set
in the great hall, and dinner served up. Then they sat down and ate
and drank together, and in the evening the wedding was solemnized
with great rejoicings.
There was once a young huntsman who went into the forest to lie in
wait.  He had a fresh and joyous heart, and as he was going thither,
whistling upon a leaf, an ugly old crone came up, who spoke to him
and said, "Good-day, dear huntsman, truly you are merry and
contented, but I am suffering from hunger and thirst, do give me an
alms." The huntsman took pity on the poor old creature, felt in his
pocket, and gave her what he could afford.

He was then about to go further, but the old woman stopped him and
said, "Listen, dear huntsman, to what I tell you.  I will make you a
present in return for your good heart.  Go on your way now, but in a
little while you will come to a tree, whereon nine birds are sitting
which have a cloak in their claws, and are fighting for it, take your
gun and shoot into the midst of them.  They will let the cloak fall
down to you, but one of the birds will be hurt, and will drop down
dead.  Carry away the cloak, it is a wishing-cloak.  When you throw
it over your shoulders, you only have to wish to be in a certain
place, and you will be there in the twinkling of an eye.  Take out
the heart of the dead bird and swallow it whole, and every morning
early, when you get up, you will find a gold piece under your
pillow." The huntsman thanked the wise woman, and thought to himself,
"Those are fine things that she has promised me, if all does but come
true." And verily when he had walked about a hundred paces, he heard
in the branches above him such a screaming and twittering that he
looked up and saw there a swarm of birds who were tearing a piece of
cloth about with their beaks and claws, and tugging and fighting as
if each wanted to have it all to himself.  "Well," said the huntsman,
"this is amazing, it has really come to pass just as the old crone
foretold," and he took the gun from his shoulder, aimed and fired
right into the midst of them, so that the feathers flew about.  The
birds instantly took to flight with loud outcries, but one dropped
down dead, and the cloak fell at the same time.  Then the huntsman
did as the old woman had directed him, cut open the bird, sought the
heart, swallowed it down, and took the cloak home with him.

Next morning, when he awoke, the promise occurred to him, and he
wished to see if it also had been fulfilled.  When he lifted up the
pillow, the gold piece shone in his eyes, and next day he found
another, and so it went on, every time he got up.  He gathered
together a heap of gold, but at last he thought, "Of what use is all
my gold to me if I stay at home?  I will go forth and see the world."

He then took leave of his parents, buckled on his huntsman's pouch
and gun, and went out into the world.  It came to pass, that one day
he traveled through a dense forest, and when he came to the end of
it, in the plain before him stood a fine castle.  An old woman was
standing with a wonderfully beautiful maiden, looking out of one of
the windows.  The old woman, however, was a witch and said to the
maiden, "There comes one out of the forest, who has a wonderful
treasure in his body.  We must filch it from him, daughter of my
heart, it is more suitable for us than for him.  He has a bird's
heart about him, by means of which a gold piece lies every morning
under his pillow." She told her what she was to do to get it, and
what part she had to play, and finally threatened her, and said with
angry eyes, "And if you do not attend to what I say, it will be the
worse for you." Now when the huntsman came nearer he noticed the
maiden, and said to himself, "I have traveled about for such a long
time, I will take a rest for once, and enter that beautiful castle.
I have certainly money enough." Nevertheless, the real reason was
that he had caught sight of the beautiful picture.

He entered the house, and was well received and courteously
entertained.  Before long he was so much in love with the young witch
that he no longer thought of anything else, and only saw things as
she saw them, and liked to do what she desired.  The old woman then
said, "Now we must have the bird's heart, he will never miss it." She
brewed a potion, and when it was ready, poured it into a goblet and
gave it to the maiden, who was to present it to the huntsman.  She
did so, saying, "Now, my dearest, drink to me."

So he took the goblet, and when he had swallowed the draught, he
brought up the heart of the bird.  The girl had to take it away
secretly and swallow it herself, for the old woman would have it so.
Thenceforward he found no more gold under his pillow, but it lay
instead under that of the maiden, from whence the old woman fetched
it away every morning, but he was so much in love and so befooled,
that he thought of nothing else but of passing his time with the
girl.

Then the old witch said, "We have the bird's heart, but we must also
take the wishing-cloak away from him." The girl answered, "We will
leave him that, he has lost his wealth." The old woman was angry and
said, "Such a mantle is a wonderful thing, and is seldom to be found
in this world.  I must and will have it." She gave the girl several
blows, and said that if she did not obey, it should fare ill with
her.  So she did the old woman's bidding, placed herself at the
window and looked on the distant country, as if she were very
sorrowful.  The huntsman asked, "Why do you stand there so
sorrowfully?" "Ah, my beloved," was her answer, "over yonder lies the
garnet mountain, where the precious stones grow.  I long for them so
much that when I think of them, I feel quite sad, but who can get
them.  Only the birds, they fly and can reach them, but a man never."
"Have you nothing else to complain of?" said the huntsman.  "I will
soon remove that burden from your heart." With that he drew her under
his mantle, wished himself on the garnet mountain, and in the
twinkling of an eye they were sitting on it together.  Precious
stones were glistening on every side so that it was a joy to see
them, and together they gathered the finest and costliest of them.

Now, the old woman had, through her sorceries, contrived that the
eyes of the huntsman should become heavy.  He said to the maiden, "We
will sit down and rest awhile, I am so tired that I can no longer
stand on my feet." Then they sat down, and he laid his head in her
lap, and fell asleep. When he was asleep, she unfastened the mantle
from his shoulders, and wrapped herself in it, picked up the garnets
and stones, and wished herself back at home with them.

But when the huntsman had slept his fill and awoke, and perceived
that his sweetheart had betrayed him, and left him alone on the wild
mountain, he said, "Oh, what treachery there is in the world," and
sat down there in trouble and sorrow, not knowing what to do.  But
the mountain belonged to some wild and monstrous giants who dwelt
thereon and lived their lives there, and he had not sat long before
he saw three of them coming towards him, so he lay down as if he were
sunk in a deep sleep.

Then the giants came up, and the first kicked him with his foot and
said, "What sort of an earth-worm is this, lying here contemplating
his inside?" The second said, "Step upon him and kill him." But the
third said, contemptuously, "That would indeed be worth your while,
just let him live, he cannot remain here, and when he climbs higher,
toward the summit of of the mountain, the clouds will lay hold of him
and bear him away." So saying they passed by.  But the huntsman had
paid heed to their words, and as soon as they were gone, he rose and
climbed up to the summit of the mountain, and when he had sat there a
while, a cloud floated towards him, caught him up, carried him away,
and traveled about for a long time in the heavens.  Then it sank
lower, and let itself down on a great cabbage-garden, girt round by
walls, so that he came softly to the ground on cabbages and
vegetables.

Then the huntsman looked about him and said, "If I had but something
to eat.  I am so hungry, and to proceed on my way from here will be
difficult.  I see here neither apples nor pears, nor any other sort
of fruit, everywhere nothing but cabbages, but at length he thought,
at a pinch I can eat some of the leaves, they do not taste
particularly good, but they will refresh me." With that he picked
himself out a fine head of cabbage, and ate it, but scarcely had he
swallowed a couple of mouthfuls than he felt very strange and quite
different.

Four legs grew on him, a thick head and two long ears, and he saw
with horror that he was changed into an ass.  Still as his hunger
increased every minute, and as the juicy leaves were suitable to his
present nature, he went on eating with great zest.  At last he
arrived at a different kind of cabbage, but as soon as he had
swallowed it, he again felt a change, and resumed his former human
shape.

Then the huntsman lay down and slept off his fatigue.  When he awoke
next morning, he broke off one head of the bad cabbages and another
of the good ones, and thought to himself, this shall help me to get
my own again and punish treachery.  Then he took the cabbages with
him, climbed over the wall, and went forth to look for the castle of
his sweetheart.  After wandering about for a couple of days he was
lucky enough to find it again.  He dyed his face brown, so that his
own mother would not have known him, and begged for shelter, "I am so
tired," said he, "that I can go no further." The witch asked, "Who
are you, countryman, and what is your business?" "I am a king's
messenger, and was sent out to seek the most delicious salad which
grows beneath the sun.  I have even been so fortunate as to find it,
and am carrying it about with me, but the heat of the sun is so
intense that the delicate cabbage threatens to wither, and I do not
know if I can carry it any further."

When the old woman heard of the exquisite salad, she was greedy, and
said, "Dear countryman, let me just try this wonderful salad." "Why
not?" answered he.  "I have brought two heads with me, and will give
you one of them," and he opened his pouch and handed her the bad
cabbage.  The witch suspected nothing amiss, and her mouth watered so
for this new dish that she herself went into the kitchen and dressed
it.  When it was prepared she could not wait until it was set on the
table, but took a couple of leaves at once, and put them in her
mouth, but hardly had she swallowed them than she was deprived of her
human shape, and she ran out into the courtyard in the form of an
ass.

Presently the maid-servant entered the kitchen, saw the salad
standing there ready prepared, and was about to carry it up, but on
the way, according to habit, she was seized by the desire to taste,
and she ate a couple of leaves.  Instantly the magic power showed
itself, and she likewise became an ass and ran out to the old woman,
and the dish of salad fell to the ground.

Meantime the messenger sat beside the beautiful girl, and as no one
came with the salad and she also was longing for it, she said, "I
don't know what has become of the salad." The huntsman thought, the
salad must have already taken effect, and said, "I will go to the
kitchen and inquire about it." As he went down he saw the two asses
running about in the courtyard, the salad, however, was lying on the
ground. "All right," said he, "the two have taken their portion," and
he picked up the other leaves, laid them on the dish, and carried
them to the maiden.  "I bring you the delicate food myself," said he,
"in order that you may not have to wait longer." Then she ate of it,
and was, like the others, immediately deprived of her human form, and
ran out into the courtyard in the shape of an ass.

After the huntsman had washed his face, so that the transformed ones
could recognize him, he went down into the courtyard, and said, "Now
you shall receive the wages of your treachery," and bound them
together, all three with one rope, and drove them along until he came
to a mill.  He knocked at the window, the miller put out his head,
and asked what he wanted.  "I have three unmanageable beasts,
answered he, which I don't want to keep any longer.  Will you take
them in, and give them food and stable room, and manage them as I
tell you, and then I will pay you what you ask?" The miller said,
"Why not?  But how am I to manage them?" The huntsman then said that
he was to give three beatings and one meal daily to the old donkey,
and that was the witch, one beating and three meals to the younger
one, which was the servant-girl, and to the youngest, which was the
maiden, no beatings and three meals, for he could not bring himself
to have the maiden beaten. After that he went back into the castle,
and found therein everything he needed.

After a couple of days, the miller came and said he must inform him
that the old ass which had received three beatings and only one meal
daily was dead.  The two others, he continued, are certainly not
dead, and are fed three times daily, but they are so sad that they
cannot last much longer.  The huntsman was moved to pity, put away
his anger, and told the miller to drive them back again to him.  And
when they came, he gave them some of the good salad, so that they
became human again.  The beautiful girl fell on her knees before him,
and said, "Ah, my beloved, forgive me for the evil I have done you,
my mother drove me to it.  It was done against my will, for I love
you dearly.  Your wishing-cloak hangs in a cupboard, and as for the
bird's-heart I will take a vomiting potion." But he thought
otherwise, and said, "Keep it.  It is all the same, for I will take
you for my true wife." So the wedding was celebrated, and they lived
happily together until their death.
A poor servant-girl was once traveling with the family with which she
was in service, through a great forest, and when they were in the
midst of it, robbers came out of the thicket, and murdered all they
found.  All perished together except the girl, who had jumped out of
the carriage in a fright, and hidden herself behind a tree.  When the
robbers had gone away with their booty, she came out and beheld the
great disaster.  Then she began to weep bitterly, and said, "What can
a poor girl like me do now?  I do not know how to get out of the
forest, no human being lives in it, so I must certainly starve."

She walked about and looked for a road, but could find none.  When it
was evening she seated herself under a tree, gave herself into God's
keeping, and resolved to sit waiting there and not go away, let
happen what might.  When she had sat there for a while, a white dove
came flying to her with a little golden key in its beak.  It put the
little key in her hand, and said, "Do you see that great tree,
therein is a little lock, open it with the tiny key, and you will
find food enough, and suffer no more hunger."

Then she went to the tree and opened it, and found milk in a little
dish, and white bread to break into it, so that she could eat her
fill.  When she was satisfied, she said, "It is now the time when the
hens at home go to roost, I am so tired I could go to bed too." Then
the dove flew to her again, and brought another golden key in its
bill, and said, "Open that tree there, and you will find a bed." So
she opened it, and found a beautiful white bed, and she prayed God to
protect her during the night, and lay down and slept.

In the morning the dove came for the third time, and again brought a
little key, and said, "Open that tree there, and you will find
clothes." And when she opened it, she found garments beset with gold
and with jewels, more splendid than those of any king's daughter.  So
she lived there for some time, and the dove came every day and
provided her with all she needed, and it was a quiet good life.

Then one day the dove came and said, "Will you do something for my
sake?" "With all my heart," said the girl.  Then said the little
dove, "I will guide you to a small house, enter it and inside it, an
old woman will be sitting by the fire and will say, 'good-day.' But
on your life give her no answer, let her do what she will, but pass
by her on the right side. Further on, there is a door, which open,
and you will enter into a room where a quantity of rings of all kinds
are lying, amongst which are some magnificent ones with shining
stones.  Leave them, however, where they are, and seek out a plain
one, which must likewise be amongst them, and bring it here to me as
quickly as you can."

The girl went to the little house, and came to the door.  There sat
an old woman who stared when she saw her, and said, "Good-day my
child." The girl gave her no answer, and opened the door.  "Whither
away?" cried the old woman, and seized her by the gown, and wanted to
hold her fast, saying, "That is my house, no one can go in there if I
choose not to allow it." But the girl was silent, got away from her,
and went straight into the room.

Now there lay on the table an enormous quantity of rings, which
gleamed and glittered before her eyes.  She turned them over and
looked for the plain one, but could not find it.  While she was
seeking, she saw the old woman and how she was stealing away, and
wanting to go off with a bird-cage which she had in her hand.  So she
went after her and took the cage out of her hand, and when she raised
it up and looked into it, a bird was inside which had the plain ring
in its bill.

Then she took the ring, and ran quite joyously home with it, and
thought the little white dove would come and get the ring, but it did
not.  Then she leant against a tree, determined to wait for the dove.
As she thus stood, it seemed just as if the tree was soft and pliant,
and was letting its branches down.  And suddenly the branches twined
around her, and were two arms, and when she looked around, the tree
was a handsome man, who embraced and kissed her heartily, and said,
"You have delivered me from the power of the old woman, who is a
wicked witch.  She had changed me into a tree, and every day for two
hours I was a white dove, and so long as she possessed the ring I
could not regain my human form." Then his servants and his horses,
who had likewise been changed into trees, were freed from the
enchanter also, and stood beside him.  And he led them forth to his
kingdom, for he was a king's son, and they married, and lived
happily.
There was once a man who had three sons, and nothing else in the
world but the house in which he lived.  Now each of the sons wished
to have the house after his father's death, but the father loved them
all alike, and did not know what to do, he did not wish to sell the
house, because it had belonged to his forefathers, else he might have
divided the money amongst them. At last he conceived a plan, and he
said to his sons, "Go into the world, and try each of you to learn a
trade, and, when you all come back, he who makes the best masterpiece
shall have the house."

The sons were well content with this, and the eldest determined to be
a blacksmith, the second a barber, and the third a fencing-master.
They fixed a time when they should all come home again, and then each
went his way.

It chanced that they all found skillful masters, who taught them
their trades well.  The blacksmith had to shoe the king's horses, and
he thought to himself, "The house is mine, without doubt." The barber
shaved only distinguished people, and he too already looked upon the
house as his own.  The fencing-master suffered many a blow, but he
grit his teeth, and let nothing vex him, for, said he to himself, "If
you are afraid of a blow, you'll never win the house."

When the appointed time had gone by, the three brothers came back
home to their father, but they did not know how to find the best
opportunity for showing their skill, so they sat down and consulted
together.  As they were sitting thus, all at once a hare came running
across the field.  Ah, ha, just in time, said the barber.  So he took
his basin and soap, and lathered away until the hare drew near, then
he soaped and shaved off the hare's whiskers whilst he was running at
the top of his speed, and did not even cut his skin or injure a hair
on his body. "Well done," said the old man. "If the others do not
make a great effort, the house is yours."

Soon after, up came a nobleman in his coach, dashing along at full
speed.  "Now you shall see what I can do, father," said the
blacksmith.  So away he ran after the coach, took all four shoes off
the feet of one of the horses whilst he was galloping, and put on
four new shoes without stopping him.  "You are a fine fellow, and as
clever as your brother," said his father.  "I do not know to which I
ought to give the house."

Then the third son said, "Father, let me have my turn, if you
please," and, as it was beginning to rain, he drew his sword, and
flourished it backwards and forwards above his head so fast that not
a drop fell upon him.  It rained still harder and harder, till at
last it came down in torrents, but he only flourished his sword
faster and faster, and remained as dry as if he were sitting in a
house.  When his father saw this he was amazed, and said, "This is
the masterpiece, the house is yours."

His brothers were satisfied with this, as was agreed beforehand, and,
as they loved one another very much, they all three stayed together
in the house, followed their trades, and, as they had learnt them so
well and were so clever, they earned a great deal of money.  Thus
they lived together happily until they grew old, and at last, when
one of them fell sick and died, the two others grieved so sorely
about it that they also fell ill, and soon after died.  And because
they had been so clever, and had loved one another so much, they were
all laid in the same grave.
There was a great war, and the king had many soldiers, but gave them
small pay, so small that they could not live upon it, so three of
them agreed among themselves to desert.  One of them said to the
others, "If we are caught we shall be hanged on the gallows, how
shall we manage it?" Another said, "Look at that great cornfield, if
we were to hide ourselves there, no one could find us, the troops are
not allowed to enter it, and to-morrow they are to march away." They
crept into the corn, only the troops did not march away, but remained
lying all round about it.  They stayed in the corn for two days and
two nights, and were so hungry that they all but died, but if they
had come out, their death would have been certain.  Then said they,
"What is the use of our deserting if we have to perish miserably
here?"

But now a fiery dragon came flying through the air, and it came down
to them, and asked why they had concealed themselves there.  They
answered, "We are three soldiers who have deserted because the pay
was so bad, and now we shall have to die of hunger if we stay here,
or to dangle on the gallows if we go out." "If you will serve me for
seven years," said the dragon, "I will convey you through the army so
that no one shall seize you." "We have no choice and are compelled to
accept," they replied.  Then the dragon caught hold of them with his
claws, and carried them away through the air over the army, and put
them down again on the earth far from it, but the dragon was no other
than the devil.  He gave them a small whip and said, "Whip with it
and crack it, and then as much gold will spring up round about as you
can wish for, then you can live like great lords, keep horses, and
drive your carriages, but when the seven years have come to an end,
you are my property."

Then he put before them a book which they were all three forced to
sign.  "But first I will ask you a riddle," said he, "and if you can
guess it, you shall be free, and released from my power." Then the
dragon flew away from them, and they went away with their whip, had
gold in plenty, ordered themselves rich apparel, and traveled about
the world.  Wherever they were they lived in pleasure and
magnificence, rode on horseback, drove in carriages, ate and drank,
but did nothing wicked.  The time slipped quickly by, and when the
seven years were coming to an end, two of them were terribly anxious
and alarmed, but the third took the affair easily, and said,
"Brothers, fear nothing, I still have my wits about me, I shall guess
the riddle." They went out into the open country and sat down, and
the two pulled sorrowful faces.  Then an aged woman came up to them
who inquired why they were so sad. "Well," said they, "what has that
got to do with you?  After all, you cannot help us." "Who knows?"
said she. "Just confide your trouble to me." So they told her that
they had been the devil's servants for nearly seven years, and that
he had provided them with gold as though it were hay, but that they
had sold themselves to him, and were forfeited to him, if at the end
of the seven years they could not guess a riddle.

The old woman said, "If you are to be saved, one of you must go into
the forest, there he will come to a fallen rock which looks like a
little house, he must enter that, and then he will obtain help." The
two melancholy ones thought to themselves, "That will still not save
us," and stayed where they were, but the third, the merry one, got up
and walked on in the forest until he found the rockhouse.  In the
little house a very aged woman was sitting, who was the devil's
grandmother, and asked the soldier where he came from, and what he
wanted there.  He told her everything that had happened, and as he
pleased her well, she had pity on him, and said she would help him.
She lifted up a great stone which lay above a cellar, and said,
"Conceal yourself there, you can hear everything that is said here,
only sit still, and do not stir.  When the dragon comes, I will
question him about the riddle, he tells everything to me, so listen
carefully to his answer."

At twelve o'clock at night, the dragon came flying thither, and asked
for his dinner.  The grandmother laid the table, and served up food
and drink, so that he was pleased, and they ate and drank together.
In the course of conversation, she asked him what kind of a day he
had had, and how many souls he had got.  "Nothing went very well
to-day," he answered, "but I have laid hold of three soldiers, I have
them safe." "Indeed? Three soldiers, they're clever, they may escape
you yet." The devil said mockingly, "They are mine.  I will set them
a riddle, which they will never be able to guess." "What riddle is
that?" she inquired. "I will tell you, in the great north sea lies a
dead dogfish, that shall be your roast meat, and the rib of a whale
shall be your silver spoon, and a hollow old horse's hoof shall be
your wineglass."

When the devil had gone to bed, the old grandmother raised up the
stone, and let out the soldier.  "Did you give heed to everything?"
"Yes," said he, "I know enough, and will save myself." Then he had to
go back another way, through the window, secretly and with all speed
to his companions.  He told them how the devil had been outwitted by
the old grandmother, and how he had learned the answer to the riddle
from him.  Then they were all delighted, and of good cheer, and took
the whip and whipped so much gold for themselves that it ran all over
the ground.

When the seven years had fully gone by, the devil came with the book,
showed the signatures, and said, "I will take you with me to hell.
There you shall have a meal.  If you can guess what kind of roast
meat you will have to eat, you shall be free and released from your
bargain, and may keep the whip as well." Then the first soldier began
and said, "In the great north sea lies a dead dogfish, that no doubt
is the roast meat."

The devil was angry, and began to mutter, "Hm. Hm. Hm." And asked the
second, "But what will your spoon be?" "The rib of a whale, that is
to be our silver spoon." The devil made a wry face, again growled,
"Hm. Hm. Hm." He said to the third, "And do you also know what your
wineglass is to be?" "An old horse's hoof is to be our wineglass."
Then the devil flew away with a loud cry, and had no more power over
them, but the three kept the whip, whipped as much money for
themselves with it as they wanted, and lived happily to their end.

Once upon a time lived a man and a woman who so long as they were
rich had no children, but when they were poor they got a little boy.
They could find no godfather for him, so the man said he would just
go to another village to see if he could get one there.  On his way
he met a poor man, who asked him where he was going.  He said he was
going to see if he could get a godfather, because he was so poor that
no one would stand as godfather for him.  "Oh," said the poor man,
"you are poor, and I am poor.  I will be godfather for you, but I am
so badly off I can give the child nothing.  Go home and tell the
midwife that she is to come to the church with the child." When they
all got to the church together, the beggar was already there, and he
gave the child the name of Ferdinand the Faithful.

When he was going out of the church, the beggar said, "Now go home, I
can give you nothing, and you likewise ought to give me nothing." But
he gave a key to the midwife, and told her when she got home she was
to give it to the father, who was to take care of it until the child
was fourteen years old, and then he was to go on the heath where
there was a castle which the key would fit, and that all which was
therein should belong to him.

Now when the child was seven years old and had grown very big, he
once went to play with some other boys, and each of them boasted that
he had got more from his godfather than the other, but the child
could say nothing, and was vexed, and went home and said to his
father, "Did I get nothing at all, then, from my godfather?" "Oh,
yes," said the father, "you have a key.  If there is a castle
standing on the heath, just go to it and open it." Then the boy went
thither, but no castle was to be seen, or heard of.

After seven years more, when he was fourteen years old, he again went
thither, and there stood the castle.  When he had opened it, there
was nothing within but a horse, - a white one.  Then the boy was so
full of joy because he had a horse, that he mounted on it and
galloped back to his father.  "Now I have a white horse, and I will
travel," said he.

So he set out, and as he was on his way, a pen was lying on the road.
At first he thought he would pick it up, but then again he thought to
himself, "You should leave it lying there, you will easily find a pen
where you are going, if you have need of one." As he was thus riding
away, a voice called after him, "Ferdinand the Faithful, take it with
you." He looked around, but saw no one, so he went back again and
picked it up.

When he had ridden a little way farther, he passed by a lake, and a
fish was lying on the bank, gasping and panting for breath, so he
said, "Wait, my dear fish, I will help you to get into the water,"
and he took hold of it by the tail, and threw it into the lake.  Then
the fish put its head out of the water and said, "As you have helped
me out of the mud I will give you a flute.  When you are in any need,
play on it, and then I will help you, and if ever you let anything
fall in the water, just play and I will reach it out to you."

Then he rode away, and there came to him a man who asked him where he
was going.  "Oh, to the next place." "What is your name?" "Ferdinand
the Faithful." "So, then we have almost the same name, I am called
Ferdinand the Unfaithful." And they both set out to the inn in the
nearest place.

Now it was unfortunate that Ferdinand the Unfaithful knew everything
that the other had ever thought and everything he was about to do. He
knew it by means of all kinds of wicked arts.  There was in the inn
an honest girl, who had a bright face and behaved very prettily. She
fell in love with Ferdinand the Faithful because he was a handsome
man, and she asked him whither he was going.  "Oh, I am just
traveling round about," said he.  Then she said he ought to stay
there, for the king of that country wanted an attendant or an
outrider, and he ought to enter his service.  He answered he could
not very well go to any one like that and offer himself.  Then said
the maiden, "Oh, but I will soon do that for you." And so she went
straight to the king, and told him that she knew of an excellent
servant for him.  He was well pleased with that, and had Ferdinand
the Faithful brought to him, and wanted to make him his servant.  He,
however, liked better to be an outrider, for where his horse was,
there he also wanted to be, so the king made him an outrider.

When Ferdinand the Unfaithful learnt that, he said to the girl,
"What? Do you help him and not me?" "Oh," said the girl, "I will help
you too." She thought, I must keep friends with that man, for he is
not to be trusted.  She went to the king, and offered him as a
servant, and the king was willing.

Now when the king met his lords in the morning, he always lamented
and said, "Oh, if I only had my love with me." Ferdinand the
Unfaithful, however, was always hostile to Ferdinand the Faithful. So
once, when the king was complaining thus, he said, "You have the
outrider, send him away to get her, and if he does not do it, his
head must be struck off." Then the king sent for Ferdinand the
Faithful, and told him that there was, in this place or in that
place, a girl he loved, and that he was to bring her to him, and if
he did not do it he should die.  Ferdinand the Faithful went into the
stable to his white horse, and complained and lamented, "Oh, what an
unhappy man am I." Then someone behind him cried, "Ferdinand the
Faithful, why do you weep?" He looked round but saw no one, and went
on lamenting.  "Oh, my dear little white horse, now must I leave you,
now I must die." Then someone cried once more, "Ferdinand the
Faithful, why do you weep?" Then for the first time he was aware that
it was his little white horse who was putting that question.  "Do you
speak, my little white horse?  Can you do that?" And again, he said,
"I am to go to this place and to that, and am to bring the bride.
Can you tell me how I am to set about it?" Then answered the white
horse, "Go to the king, and say if he will give you what you must
have, you will get her for him.  If he will give you a ship full of
meat, and a ship full of bread, it will succeed.  Great giants dwell
on the lake, and if you take no meat with you for them, they will
tear you to pieces, and there are the large birds which would pluck
the eyes out of your head if you had no bread for them.  Then the
king made all the butchers in the land kill, and all the bakers bake,
that the ships might be filled."

When they were full, the little white horse said to Ferdinand the
Faithful, "Now mount me, and go with me into the ship, and then when
the giants come, say - peace, peace, my dear little giants,  I have
had thought of ye,  something I have brought for ye.  And when the
birds come, you shall again say - peace, peace, my dear little birds,
I have had thought of ye,  something I have brought for ye.  Then
they will do nothing to you, and when you come to the castle, the
giants will help you.  Then go up to the castle, and take a couple of
giants with you.  There the princess lies sleeping.  You must,
however, not awaken her, but the giants must lift her up, and carry
her in her bed to the ship." And now everything took place as the
little white horse had said, and Ferdinand the Faithful gave the
giants and the birds what he had brought with him for them, and that
made the giants willing, and they carried the princess in her bed to
the king.  And when she came to the king, she said she could not
live, she must have her writings, they had been left in her castle.

Then by the instigation of Ferdinand the Unfaithful, Ferdinand the
Faithful was called, and the king told him he must fetch the writings
from the castle, or he should die.  Then he went once more into the
stable, and bemoaned himself and said, "Oh, my dear little white
horse, now I am to go away again, how am I to do it?" Then the little
white horse said he was just to load the ships full again.  So it
happened again as it had happened before, and the giants and the
birds were satisfied, and made gentle by the meat.  When they came to
the castle, the white horse told Ferdinand the Faithful that he must
go in, and that on the table in the princess's bed-room lay the
writings.  And Ferdinand the Faithful went in, and fetched them. When
they were on the lake, he let his pen fall into the water.  Then said
the white horse, "Now I cannot help you at all." But he remembered
his flute, and began to play on it, and the fish came with the pen in
its mouth, and gave it to him.  So he took the writings to the
castle, where the wedding was celebrated.

The queen, however, did not love the king because he had no nose, but
she would have much liked to love Ferdinand the Faithful.  Once,
therefore, when all the lords of the court were together, the queen
said she could do feats of magic, that she could cut off anyone's
head and put it on again, and that one of them ought just to try it.
But none of them would be the first, so Ferdinand the Faithful, again
at the instigation of Ferdinand the Unfaithful, undertook it and she
hewed off his head, and put it on again for him, and it healed
together directly, so that it looked as if he had a red thread round
his throat.  Then the king said to her, "My child, and where have you
learnt that?" "Oh," she said, "I understand the art.  Shall I just
try it on you also." "Oh, yes," said he.  So she cut off his head,
but did not put it on again, and pretended that she could not get it
on, and that it would not stay.  Then the king was buried, but she
married Ferdinand the Faithful.

He, however, always rode on his white horse, and once when he was
seated on it, it told him that he was to go on to the heath which he
knew, and gallop three times round it.  And when he had done that,
the white horse stood up on its hind legs, and was changed into a
king's son.

In the days when wishing was still of some use, a king's son was
bewitched by an old witch, and shut up in an iron stove in a forest.
There he passed many years, and no one could rescue him.  Then a
king's daughter came into the forest, who had lost herself, and could
not find her father's kingdom again.  After she had wandered about
for nine days, she at length came to the iron stove.

Then a voice came forth from it, and asked her, "Whence do you come,
and whither are you going?" She answered, "I have lost my father's
kingdom, and cannot get home again." Then a voice inside the iron
stove said, "I will help you to get home again, and that indeed most
swiftly, if you will promise to do what I desire of you.  I am the
son of a far greater king than your father, and I will marry you."

Then was she afraid, and thought, "Good heavens.  What can I do with
an iron stove?" But as she much wished to get home to her father, she
promised to do as he desired.  But he said, "You shall return here,
and bring a knife with you, and scrape a hole in the iron." Then he
gave her a companion who walked near her, but did not speak, and in
two hours he took her home.  There was great joy in the castle when
the king's daughter came home, and the old king fell on her neck and
kissed her.  She, however, was sorely troubled, and said, "Dear
father, what I have suffered.  I should never have got home again
from the great wild forest, if I had not come to an iron stove, but I
have been forced to give my word that I will go back to it, set it
free, and marry it."

Then the old king was so terrified that he all but fainted, for he
had but this one daughter.  They therefore resolved they would send,
in her place, the miller's daughter, who was very beautiful.  They
took her there, gave her a knife, and said she was to scrape at the
iron stove.  So she scraped at it for four-and-twenty hours, but
could not bring off the least morsel of it.  When the day dawned, a
voice in the stove said, "It seems to me it is day outside." Then she
answered, "It seems so to me too, I fancy I hear the noise of my
father's mill." "So you are a miller's daughter.  Then go your way at
once, and let the king's daughter come here."

Then she went away at once, and told the old king that the man
outside there would have none of her - he wanted the king's daughter.
Then the old king grew frightened, and the daughter wept.  But there
was a swine-herd's daughter, who was even prettier than the miller's
daughter, and they determined to give her a piece of gold to go to
the iron stove instead of the king's daughter.  So she was taken
thither and she also had to scrape for four-and-twenty hours.  She,
however, was no better at it.  When the day broke, a voice inside the
stove cried, "It seems to me it is day outside." Then answered she,
"So it seems to me also, I fancy I hear my father's horn blowing."
"Then you are a swineherd's daughter.  Go away at once, and tell the
king's daughter to come, and tell her all must be done as promised,
and if she does not come, everything in the kingdom shall be ruined
and destroyed, and not one stone be left standing on another."

When the king's daughter heard that she began to weep, but now there
was nothing for it but to keep her promise.  So she took leave of her
father, put a knife in her pocket, and went forth to the iron stove
in the forest.  When she got there, she began to scrape, and the iron
gave way, and when two hours were over, she had already scraped a
small hole. Then she peeped in, and saw a youth so handsome, and so
brilliant with gold and with precious jewels, that her very soul was
delighted.  So she went on scraping, and made the hole so large that
he was able to get out.

Then said he, "You are mine, and I am yours, you are my bride, and
have released me." He wanted to take her away with him to his
kingdom, but she entreated him to let her go once again to her
father, and the king's son allowed her to do so, but she was not to
say more to her father than three words, and then she was to come
back again. So she went home, but she spoke more than three words,
and instantly the iron stove disappeared, and was taken far away over
glass mountains and piercing swords, but the king's son was set free,
and no longer shut up in it.  After this she bade good-bye to her
father, took some money with her, but not much, and went back to the
great forest, and looked for the iron stove, but it was nowhere to be
found.

For nine days she sought it, and then her hunger grew so great that
she did not know what to do, for she had nothing to live on.  When it
was evening, she seated herself in a small tree, and made up her mind
to spend the night there, as she was afraid of wild beasts.  When
midnight drew near she saw in the distance a small light, and
thought, ah, there I should be saved.  She got down from the tree,
and went towards the light, but on the way she prayed.  Then she came
to a little old house, and much grass had grown all about it, and a
small heap of wood lay in front of it.  She thought, "Ah, whither
have I come?" and peeped in through the window, but she saw nothing
inside but toads, big and little, except a table covered with wine
and roast meat, and the plates and glasses were of silver.  Then she
took courage, and knocked at the door, and immediately the fat toad
cried,
	"Little green waiting-maid,
	Waiting-maid with the limping leg,
	Little dog of the limping leg,
	Hop hither and thither,
	And quickly see who is without."

And a small toad came walking by and opened the door to her. When she
entered, they all bade her welcome, and she was forced to sit down.
They asked, "Where have you come from, and whither are you going?"
Then she related all that had befallen her, and how because she had
transgressed the order which had been given her not to say more than
three words, the stove, and the king's son also, had disappeared, and
now she was about to seek him over the hill and dale until she found
him.  Then the old fat one said,
	"Little green waiting-maid,
	Waiting-maid with the limping leg,
	Little dog of the limping leg,
	Hop hither and thither,
	And bring me the great box."

Then the little one went and brought the box.  After this they gave
her meat and drink, and took her to a well-made bed, which felt like
silk and velvet, and she laid herself therein, in God's name, and
slept.  When morning came she arose, and the old toad gave her three
needles out of the great box which she was to take with her, they
would be needed by her, for she had to cross a high glass mountain,
and go over three piercing swords and a great lake. If she did all
this she would get her lover back again.

Then she gave her three things, which she was to take the greatest
care of, namely, three large needles, a plough-wheel, and three nuts.
With these she traveled onwards, and when she came to the glass
mountain which was so slippery, she stuck the three needles first
behind her feet and then before them, and so got over it, and when
she was over it, she hid them in a place which she marked carefully.
After this she came to the three piercing swords, and then she seated
herslef on her plough-wheel, and rolled over them.  At last she
arrived in front of a great lake, and when she had crossed it, she
came to a large and beautiful castle.  She went and asked for a
place, she was a poor girl, she said, and would like to be hired.
She knew, however, that the king's son whom she had released from the
iron stove in the great forest was in the castle.  Then she was taken
as a scullery-maid at low wages.  But already the king's son had
another maiden by his side whom he wanted to marry, for he thought
that she had long been dead.

In the evening, when she had washed up and was done, she felt in her
pocket and found the three nuts which the old toad had given her.
She cracked one with her teeth, and was going to eat the kernel when
lo and behold there was a stately royal garment in it.  But when the
bride heard of this she came and asked for the dress, and wanted to
buy it, and said, "It is not a dress for a servant-girl." "No," she
said, she would not sell it, but if the bride would grant her one
thing she should have it, and that was permission to sleep one night
in her bridegroom's chamber.  The bride gave her permission because
the dress was so pretty, and she had never had one like it.

When it was evening she said to her bridegroom, "That silly girl will
sleep in your room." "If you are willing, so am I," said he.  She,
however, gave him a glass of wine in which she had poured a
sleeping-draught.  So the bridegroom and the scullery-maid went to
sleep in the room, and he slept so soundly that she could not waken
him. She wept the whole night and cried, "I set you free when you
were in an iron stove in the wild forest, I sought you, and walked
over a glass mountain, and three sharp swords, and a great lake
before I found you, and yet you will not hear me." The servants sat
by the chamber-door, and heard how she thus wept the whole night
through, and in the morning they told it to their lord.

And the next evening when she had washed up, she opened the second
nut, and a far more beautiful dress was within it, and when the bride
beheld it, she wished to buy that also. But the girl would not take
money, and begged that she might once again sleep in the bridegroom's
chamber.  The bride, however, gave him a sleeping-draught, and he
slept so soundly that he could hear nothing.  But the scullery-maid
wept the whole night long, and cried, "I set you free when you were
in an iron stove in the wild forest, I sought you, and walked over a
glass mountain, and over three sharp swords and a great lake before I
found you, and yet you will not hear me." The servants sat by the
chamber-door and heard her weeping the whole night through, and in
the morning informed their lord of it.

And on the third evening, when she had washed up, she opened the
third nut, and within it was a still more beautiful dress which was
stiff with pure gold.  When the bride saw that she wanted to have it,
but the maiden only gave it up on condition that she might for the
third time sleep in the bridegroom's apartment.  The king's son,
however, was on his guard, and threw the sleeping-draught away.  Now
when she began to weep and to cry, "Dearest love, I set you free when
you were in the iron stove in the terrible wild forest" - the king's
son leapt up and said, "You are the true one, you are mine, and I am
yours."

Thereupon, while it was still night, he got into a carriage with her,
and they took away the false bride's clothes so that she could not
get up.  When they came to the great lake, they sailed across it, and
when they reached the three sharp-cutting swords they seated
themselves on the plough-wheel, and when they got to the glass
mountain they thrust the three needles in it, and so at length they
got to the little old house, but when they went inside, it was a
great castle, and the toads were all disenchanted, and were king's
children, and full of happiness.  Then the wedding was celebrated,
and the king's son and the princess remained in the castle, which was
much larger than the castle of their fathers.  But as the old king
grieved at being left alone, they fetched him away, and brought him
to live with them, and they had two kingdoms, and lived in happy
wedlock.
	A mouse did run,
	This story is done.
There was once a poor man who had four sons, and when they were grown
up, he said to them, "My dear children, you must now go out into the
world, for I have nothing to give you, so set out, go abroad and
learn a trade, and see how you can make your way." So the four
brothers took their sticks, bade their father farewell, and went
through the town-gate together.  When they had traveled about for
some time, they came to a crossroads which branched off in four
different directions.  Then said the eldest, "Here we must separate,
but on this day four years hence, we will meet each other again at
this spot, and in the meantime we will seek our fortunes."

Then each of them went his way, and the eldest met a man who asked
him where he was going, and what he was intending to do. "I want to
learn a trade," he replied.  Then the other said, "Come with me," and
be a thief.  "No," he answered, "that is no longer regarded as a
reputable trade, and the end of it is that one has to swing on the
gallows." "Oh," said the man, "you need not be afraid of the gallows,
I will only teach you to get such things as no other man could ever
lay hold of, and no one will ever detect you." So he allowed himself
to be talked into it, and while with the man became an accomplished
thief, and so dexterous that nothing was safe from him, if he once
desired to have it.

The second brother met a man who put the same question to him - what
he wanted to learn in the world.  "I don't know yet," he replied.
"Then come with me, and be an astronomer, there is nothing better
than that, for nothing is hid from you." He liked the idea, and
became such a skillful astronomer that when he had learnt everything,
and was about to travel onwards, his master gave him a telescope and
said to him, "With that you can see whatsoever takes place either on
earth or in heaven, and nothing can remain concealed from you."

A huntsman took the third brother into training, and gave him such
excellent instruction in everything which related to huntsmanship
that he became an experienced hunter.  When he went away, his master
gave him a gun and said, "It will never fail you, whatsoever you aim
at, you are certain to hit." The youngest brother also met a man who
spoke to him, and inquired what his intentions were.  "Would you not
like to be a tailor?" said he.  "Not that I know of," said the youth,
"sitting doubled up from morning till night, driving the needle and
the goose backwards and forwards, is not to my taste." "Oh, but you
are speaking in ignorance," answered the man.  "With me you would
learn a very different kind of tailoring, which is respectable and
proper, and for the most part very honorable." So he let himself be
persuaded, and went with the man, and learnt his art from the very
beginning.  When they parted, the man gave the youth a needle, and
said, "With this you can sew together whatever is given you, whether
it is as soft as an egg or as hard as steel, and it will all become
one piece of stuff, so that no seam will be visible."

When the appointed four years were over, the four brothers arrived at
the same time at the cross-roads, embraced and kissed each other, and
returned home to their father.  "So now," said he, quite delighted,
"the wind has blown you back again to me." They told him of all that
had happened to them, and that each had learnt his own trade.  Now
they were sitting just in front of the house under a large tree, and
the father said, "I will put you all to the test, and see what you
can do." Then he looked up and said to his second son, "Between two
branches up at the top of this tree, there is a chaffinch's nest,
tell me how many eggs there are in it." The astronomer took his
glass, looked up and said, "There are five." Then the father said to
the eldest, "Fetch the eggs down without disturbing the bird which is
sitting hatching them." The skillful thief climbed up, and took the
five eggs from beneath the bird, which never observed what he was
doing, and remained quietly sitting where she was, and brought them
down to his father.

The father took them, and put one of them on each corner of the
table, and the fifth in the middle, and said to the huntsman, "With
one shot you shall shoot me the five eggs in two, through the
middle." The huntsman aimed, and shot the eggs, all five as the
father had desired, and that at one shot.  He certainly must have had
some of the powder for shooting round corners.  "Now it's your turn,"
said the father to the fourth son, "You shall sew the eggs together
again, and the young birds that are inside them as well, and you must
do it so that they are not hurt by the shot." The tailor brought his
needle, and sewed them as his father wished.  When he had done this
the thief had to climb up the tree again, and carry them to the nest,
and put them back again under the bird without her being aware of it.
The bird sat her full time, and after a few days the young ones crept
out, and they had a red line round their necks where they had been
sewn together by the tailor.

"Well," said the old man to his sons, "you really ought to be praised
to the skies, you have used your time well, and learnt something
good.  I can't say which of you deserves the most praise. That will
be proved if you have but an early opportunity of using your
talents." Not long after this, there was a great uproar in the
country, for the king's daughter was carried off by a dragon. The
king was full of trouble about it, both by day an night, and caused
it to be proclaimed that whosoever brought her back should have her
to wife.

The four brothers said to each other, "This would be a fine
opportunity for us to show what we can do." And resolved to go forth
together and liberate the king's daughter. "I will soon know where
she is," said the astronomer, and looked through his telescope and
said, "I see her already, she is far away from here on a rock in the
sea, and the dragon is beside her watching her."

Then he went to the king, and asked for a ship for himself and his
brothers, and sailed with them over the sea until they came to the
rock.  There the king's daughter was sitting, and the dragon was
lying asleep on her lap.  The huntsman said, "I dare not fire, I
should kill the beautiful maiden at the same time." "Then I will try
my art," said the thief, and he crept thither and stole her away from
under the dragon, so quietly and dexterously, that the monster never
noticed it, but went on snoring.

Full of joy, they hurried off with her on board ship, and steered out
into the open sea, but the dragon, who when he awoke had found no
princess there, followed them, and came snorting angrily through the
air.  Just as he was circling above the ship, and about to descend on
it, the huntsman shouldered his gun, and shot him to the heart.  The
monster fell down dead, but was so large and powerful that his fall
shattered the whole ship.  Fortunately, however, they laid hold of a
couple of planks, and swam about the wide sea.

Then again they were in great peril, but the tailor, who was not
idle, took his wondrous needle, and with a few stitches sewed the
planks together and they seated themselves upon them, and collected
together all the fragments of the vessel.  Then he sewed these so
skillfully together, that in a very short time the ship was once more
seaworthy, and they could go home again in safety.

When the king once more saw his daughter, there were great
rejoicings.  He said to the four brothers, one of you shall have her
to wife, but which of you it is to be you must settle among
yourselves.  Then a heated argument arose among them, for each of
them preferred his own claim.  The astronomer said, "If I had not
seen the princess, all your arts would have been useless, so she is
mine." The thief said, "What would have been the use of your seeing,
if I had not got her away from the dragon.  So she is mine." The
huntsman said, "You and the princess, and all of you, would have been
torn to pieces by the dragon if my ball had not hit him, so she is
mine." The tailor said, "And if I, by my art, had not sewn the ship
together again, you would all of you have been miserably drowned, so
she is mine."

Then the king pronounced his verdict, each of you has an equal right,
and as all of you cannot have the maiden, none of you shall have her,
but I will give to each of you, as a reward, half a kingdom.  The
brothers were pleased with this decision, and said, it is better thus
than that we should be at variance with each other.  Then each of
them received half a kingdom, and they lived with their father in the
greatest happiness as long as it pleased God.
There was once a woman who had three daughters, the eldest of whom
was called One-Eye, because she had only one eye in the middle of her
forehead, and the second, Two-Eyes, because she had two eyes like
other folks, and the youngest, Three-Eyes, because she had three
eyes, and her third eye was also in the center of her forehead.
However, as Two-Eyes saw just as other human beings did, her sisters
and her mother could not endure her.  They said to her, "You, with
your two eyes, are no better than the common people, you do not
belong to us." They pushed her about, and threw old clothes to her,
and gave her nothing to eat but what they left, and did everything
that they could to make her unhappy.

It came to pass that Two-Eyes had to go out into the fields and tend
the goat, but she was still quite hungry, because her sisters had
given her so little to eat.  So she sat down on a ridge and began to
weep, and so bitterly that two streams ran down from her eyes.  And
once when she looked up in her grief, a woman was standing beside
her, who said, "Why are you weeping, little Two-Eyes?" Two-Eyes
answered, "Have I not reason to weep, when I have two eyes like other
people, and my sisters and mother hate me for it, and push me from
one corner to another, throw old clothes to me, and give me nothing
to eat but the scraps they leave.  Today they have given me so little
that I am still quite hungry." Then the wise woman said, "Wipe away
your tears, Two-Eyes, and I will tell you something to stop your ever
suffering from hunger again.  Just say to your goat -
	 `Bleat, my little goat, bleat,
	 Cover the table with something to eat,'
and then a clean well-spread little table will stand before you with
the most delicious food upon it of which you may eat as much as you
are inclined for, and when you have had enough, and have no more need
of the little table, just say,
	 `Bleat, bleat, my little goat, I pray,
	 and take the table quite away,'
and then it will vanish again from your sight." Hereupon the wise
woman departed.  But Two-Eyes thought, "I must instantly make a
trial, and see if what she said is true, for I am far too hungry,"
and she said -
	 "Bleat, my little goat, bleat,
	 Cover the table with something to eat,"
and scarcely had she spoken the words than a little table, covered
with a white cloth, was standing there, and on it was a plate with a
knife and fork, and a silver spoon, and the most delicious food was
there also, warm and smoking as if it had just come out of the
kitchen.  Then Two-Eyes said the shortest prayer she knew, "Lord God,
be our guest forever, amen," and helped herself to some food, and
enjoyed it.  And when she was satisfied, she said, as the wise woman
had taught her -
	 "Bleat, bleat, my little goat, I pray,
	 And take the table quite away,"
and immediately the little table and everything on it was gone again.
That is a delightful way of keeping house, thought Two-Eyes, and was
quite glad and happy.

In the evening, when she went home with her goat, she found a small
earthenware dish with some food, which her sisters had set ready for
her, but she did not touch it.  Next day she again went out with her
goat, and left the few bits of broken bread which had been handed to
her, lying untouched.  The first and second time that she did this,
her sisters did not notice it at all, but as it happened every time,
they did observe it, and said, "There is something wrong about
Two-Eyes, she always leaves her food untasted, and she used to eat up
everything that was given her, she must have discovered other ways of
getting food." In order that they might learn the truth, they
resolved to send One-Eye with Two-Eyes when she went to drive her
goat to the pasture, to observe what Two-Eyes did when she was there,
and whether anyone brought her anything to eat and drink.

So when Two-Eyes set out the next time, One-Eye went to her and said,
"I will go with you to the pasture, and see that the goat is well
taken care of, and driven where there is food." But Two-Eyes knew
what was in One-Eye's mind, and drove the goat into high grass and
said, "Come, One-Eye, we will sit down, and I will sing something to
you." One-Eye sat down and was tired with the unaccustomed walk and
the heat of the sun, and Two-Eyes sang constantly -
	 "One-eye, are you waking?
	 One-eye, are you sleeping?"
Until One-Eye shut her one eye, and fell asleep, and as soon as
Two-Eyes saw that One-Eye was fast asleep, and could discover
nothing, she said,
	 "Bleat, my little goat, bleat,
	 Cover the table with something to eat,"
and seated herself at her table, and ate and drank until she was
satisfied, and then she again cried -
	 "Bleat, bleat, my little goat, I pray,
	 And take the table quite away,"
and in an instant all had vanished.  Two-Eyes now awakened One-Eye,
and said, "One-Eye, you want to take care of the goat, and go to
sleep while you are doing it, but in the meantime the goat might run
all over the world.  Come, let us go home again."

So they went home, and again Two-Eyes let her dish stand untouched,
and One-Eye could not tell her mother why she would not eat it, and
to excuse herself said, "I fell asleep when I was out." Next day the
mother said to Three-Eyes, this time you shall go and observe if
Two-Eyes eats anything when she is out, and if anyone fetches her
food and drink, for she must eat and drink in secret.  So Three-Eyes
went to Two-Eyes, and said, "I will go with you and see if the goat
is taken proper care of, and driven where there is food." But
Two-Eyes knew what was in Three-Eyes' mind, and drove the goat into
high grass and said, "We will sit down, and I will sing something to
you, Three-Eyes." Three-Eyes sat down and was tired with the walk and
with the heat of the sun, and Two-Eyes began the same song as before,
and sang -
	 "Three-Eyes, are you waking?"

But then, instead of singing -
	 "Three-Eyes, are you sleeping?"

As she ought to have done, she thoughtlessly sang -
	 "Two-Eyes, are you sleeping?"

And sang all the time -
	 "Three-Eyes, are you waking?
	 Two-Eyes, are you sleeping?"

Then two of the eyes which Three-Eyes had, shut and fell asleep, but
the third, as it had not been named in the song, did not sleep.  It
is true that three-eyes shut it, but only in her cunning, to pretend
it was asleep too, but it blinked, and could see everything very
well.  And when two-eyes thought that three-eyes was fast asleep, she
used her little charm -
	 "Bleat, my little goat, bleat,
	 Cover the table with something to eat,"
and ate and drank as much as her heart desired, and then ordered the
table to go away again,
	 "Bleat, bleat, my little goat, I pray,
	 And take the table quite away,"
and Three-Eyes had seen everything.  Then Two-Eyes came to her, waked
her and said, "Have you been asleep, Three-Eyes?  You keep watch very
well.  Come, we will go home." And when they got home, Two-Eyes again
did not eat, and Three-Eyes said to the mother, "Now, I know why that
haughty thing there does not eat. When she is out, she says to the
goat -
	 `Bleat, my little goat, bleat,
	 Cover the table with something to eat,'
and then a little table appears before her covered with the best of
food, much better than any we have here, and when she has eaten all
she wants, she says -
	 `Bleat, bleat, my little goat, I pray,
	 And take the table quite away,'
and all disappears.  I watched everything closely.  She put two of my
eyes to sleep by means of a charm, but luckily the one in my forehead
kept awake."

Then the envious mother cried, "Do you want to fare better than we
do?  The desire shall pass from you," and she fetched a butcher's
knife, and thrust it into the heart of the goat, which fell down
dead. When Two-Eyes saw that, she went out full of sadness, seated
herself on the ridge of grass at the edge of the field, and wept
bitter tears.  Suddenly the wise woman once more stood by her side,
and said, "Two-Eyes, why are you weeping?" "Have I not reason to
weep?" she answered.  "The goat which covered the table for me every
day when I spoke your charm, has been killed by my mother, and now I
shall again have to bear hunger and want." The wise woman said,
"Two-Eyes, I will give you a piece of good advice, ask your sisters
to give you the entrails of the slaughtered goat, and bury them in
the ground in front of the house, and your fortune will be made."
Then she vanished, and Two-Eyes went home and said to her sisters,
"Dear sisters, do give me some part of my goat, I don't wish for what
is good, but give me the entrails." Then they laughed and said, "If
that's all you want, you can have it." So Two-Eyes took the entrails
and buried them quietly in the evening, in front of the house-door,
as the wise woman had counseled her to do.

Next morning, when they all awoke, and went to the house-door, there
stood a strangely magnificent tree with leaves of silver, and fruit
of gold hanging among them, so that in all the wide world there was
nothing more beautiful or precious.  They did not know how the tree
could have come there during the night, but Two-Eyes saw that it had
grown up out of the entrails of the goat, for it was standing on the
exact spot where she had buried them.  Then the mother said to
One-Eye, "Climb up, my child, and gather some of the fruit of the
tree for us." One-eye climbed up, but when she was about to get hold
of one of the golden apples, the branch escaped from her hands, and
that happened each time, so that she could not pluck a single apple,
let her do what she might.  Then said the mother, "Three-Eyes, you
climb up, you with your three eyes can look about you better than
One-Eye." One-Eye slipped down, and Three-Eyes climbed up.
Three-Eyes was not more skillful, and might try as she would, but the
golden apples always escaped her.

At length the mother grew impatient, and climbed up herself, but
could get hold of the fruit no better than One-Eye and Three-Eyes,
for she always clutched empty air.  Then said Two-Eyes, "Let me go
up, perhaps I may succeed better." The sisters cried, "You indeed,
with your two eyes, what can you do?" But Two-Eyes climbed up, and
the golden apples did not avoid her, but came into her hand of their
own accord, so that she could pluck them one after the other, and
brought a whole apronful down with her. The mother took them away
from her, and instead of treating poor Two-Eyes any better for this,
she and One-Eye and Three-Eyes were only envious, because Two-Eyes
alone had been able to get the fruit, and they treated her still more
cruelly.

It so befell that once when they were all standing together by the
tree, a young knight came up.  "Quick, Two-Eyes," cried the two
sisters, "creep under this, and don't disgrace us," and with all
speed they turned an empty barrel which was standing close by the
tree over poor Two-Eyes, and they swept the golden apples which she
had been gathering, under it too.  When the knight came nearer he was
a handsome lord, who stopped and admired the magnificent gold and
silver tree, and said to the two sisters, "To whom does this fine
tree belong?  Anyone who would bestow one branch of it on me might in
return for it ask whatsoever he desired." Then One-Eye and Three-Eyes
replied that the tree belonged to them, and that they would give him
a branch.  They both took great trouble, but they were not able to do
it, for the branches and fruit both moved away from them every time.
Then said the knight, "It is very strange that the tree should belong
to you, and that you should not have the power to break a piece off."
They again asserted that the tree was their property.

Whilst they were saying so, Two-Eyes rolled out a couple of golden
apples from under the barrel to the feet of the knight, for she was
vexed with One-Eye and Three-Eyes, for not speaking the truth.  When
the knight saw the apples he was astonished, and asked where they
came from.  One-Eye and Three-Eyes answered that they had another
sister, who was not allowed to show herself, for she had only two
eyes like any common person.  The knight, however, desired to see
her, and cried, "Two-Eyes, come forth." Then Two-Eyes, quite
comforted, came from beneath the barrel, and the knight was surprised
at her great beauty, and said, "You, Two-Eyes, can certainly break
off a branch from the tree for me." "Yes," replied Two-Eyes, "that I
certainly shall be able to do, for the tree belongs to me." And she
climbed up, and with the greatest ease broke off a branch with
beautiful silver leaves and golden fruit, and gave it to the knight.
Then said the knight, "Two-Eyes, what shall I give you for it?"
"Alas, answered two-eyes, "I suffer from hunger and thirst, grief and
want, from early morning till late night.  If you would take me with
you, and rescue me, I should be happy." So the knight lifted Two-Eyes
on to his horse, and took her home with him to his father's castle,
and there he gave her beautiful clothes, and meat and drink to her
heart's content, and as he loved her so much he married her, and the
wedding was solemnized with great rejoicing.

When Two-Eyes was thus carried away by the handsome knight, her two
sisters grudged her good fortune in downright earnest. "The wonderful
tree, however, still remains with us," thought they, "and even if we
can gather no fruit from it, still every one will stand still and
look at it, and come to us and admire it.  Who knows what good things
may be in store for us." But next morning, the tree had vanished, and
all their hopes were at an end.  And when Two-Eyes looked out of the
window of her own room, to her great delight it was standing in front
of it, and so it had followed her.

Two-Eyes lived a long time in happiness.  Once two poor women came to
her in her castle, and begged for alms.  She looked in their faces,
and recognized her sisters, One-Eye, and Three-Eyes, who had fallen
into such poverty that they had to wander about and beg their bread
from door to door.  Two-Eyes, however, made them welcome, and was
kind to them, and took care of them, so that they both with all their
hearts repented the evil that they had done their sister in their
youth.
"Good-day, father hollenthe." "Many thanks, pif-paf-poltrie." "May I
be allowed to have your daughter?" "Oh, yes, if mother malcho
milchcow, brother high-and-mighty, sister kasetraut, and fair
katrinelje are willing, you can have her." "Where is mother malcho,
then?" "She is in the cow-house, milking the cow."

"Good-day, mother malcho." "Many thanks, pif-paf-poltrie." "May I be
allowed to have your daughter?" "Oh, yes, if father hollenthe,
brother high-and-mighty, sister kasetraut, and fair katrinelje are
willing, you can have her." "Where is brother high-and-mighty, then?"
"He is in the room chopping some wood."

"Good-day, brother high-and-mighty." "Many thanks, pif-paf-poltrie."
"May I be allowed to have your sister?" "Oh, yes, if father
hollenthe, mother malcho, sister kasetraut, and fair katrinelje are
willing, you can have her." "Where is sister kasetraut, then?" "She
is in the garden cutting cabbages."

"Good-day, sister kasetraut." "Many thanks, pif-paf-poltrie." "May I
be allowed to have your sister?" "Oh, yes, if father hollenthe,
mother malcho, brother high-and-mighty, and fair katrinelje are
willing, you may have her." "Where is fair katrinelje, then." "She is
in the room counting out her farthings."

"Good day, fair katrinelje." "Many thanks, pif-paf-poltrie." "Will
you be my bride?" "Oh, yes, if father hollenthe, mother malcho,
brother high-and-mighty, and sister kasetraut are willing, I am
ready."

"Fair katrinelje, how much dowry do you have?" "Fourteen farthings in
ready money, three and a half groschen owing to me, half a pound of
dried apples, a handful of pretzels, and a handful of roots.
	And many other things are mine,
	Have I not a dowry fine?"

"Pif-paf-poltrie, what is your trade?  Are you a tailor?" "Something
better." "A shoemaker?" "Something better." "A husbandman?"
"Something better." "A joiner?" "Something better." "A smith?"
"Something better." "A miller?" "Something better." "Perhaps a
broom-maker?" "Yes, that's what I am, is it not a fine trade?"
There was once upon a time a king who had twelve daughters, each one
more beautiful than the other.  They all slept together in one
chamber, in which their beds stood side by side, and every night when
they were in them the king locked the door, and bolted it.  But in
the morning when he unlocked the door, he saw that their shoes were
worn out with dancing, and no one could find out how that had come to
pass.  Then the king caused it to be proclaimed that whosoever could
discover where they danced at night, should choose one of them for
his wife and be king after his death, but that whosoever came forward
and had not discovered it within three days and nights, should have
forfeited his life.

It was not long before a king's son presented himself, and offered to
undertake the enterprise. He was well received, and in the evening
was led into a room adjoining the princesses, sleeping-chamber.  His
bed was placed there, and he was to observe where they went and
danced, and in order that they might do nothing secretly or go away
to some other place, the door of their room was left open. But the
eyelids of the prince grew heavy as lead, and he fell asleep, and
when he awoke in the morning, all twelve had been to the dance, for
their shoes were standing there with holes in the soles.  On the
second and third nights there was no difference, and then his head
was struck off without mercy.

Many others came after this and undertook the enterprise, but all
forfeited their lives.  Now it came to pass that a poor soldier, who
had a wound, and could serve no longer, found himself on the road to
the town where the king lived.  There he met an old woman, who asked
him where he was going.  "I hardly know myself," answered he, and
added in jest, "I had half a mind to discover where the princesses
danced their shoes into holes, and thus become king." "That is not so
difficult," said the old woman, "you must not drink the wine which
will be brought to you at night, and must pretend to be sound
asleep." With that she gave him a little cloak, and said, "If you
wear this, you will be invisible, and then you can steal after the
twelve." When the soldier had received this good advice, he fell to
in earnest, took heart, went to the king, and announced himself as a
suitor.  He was as well received as the others, and royal garments
were put upon him.  He was conducted that evening at bed-time into
the antechamber, and as he was about to go to bed, the eldest came
and brought him a cup of wine, but he had tied a sponge under his
chin, and let the wine run down into it, without drinking a drop.

Then he lay down and when he had lain a while, he began to snore, as
if in the deepest sleep.  The twelve princesses heard that, and
laughed, and the eldest said, "He, too, might as well have saved his
life." With that they got up, opened wardrobes, presses, cupboards,
and brought out pretty dresses, dressed themselves before the
mirrors, sprang about, and rejoiced at the prospect of the dance.
Only the youngest said, "I know not how it is, you are very happy,
but I feel very strange, some misfortune is certainly about to befall
us." "You are a goose, who are always frightened," said the eldest.
"Have you forgotten how many kings' sons have already come here in
vain.  I had hardly any need to give the soldier a sleeping-draught,
the booby would not have awakened anyway."

When they were all ready they looked carefully at the soldier, but he
had closed his eyes and did not move or stir, so they felt themselves
safe enough.  The eldest then went to her bed and tapped it,
whereupon it immediately sank into the earth, and one after the other
they descended through the opening, the eldest going first.  The
soldier, who had watched everything, tarried no longer, put on his
little cloak, and went down last with the youngest.  Half-way down
the steps, he just trod a little on her dress, she was terrified at
that, and cried out, "What is that?  Who is pulling my dress?" "Don't
be so silly," said the eldest, "you have caught it on a nail."

Then they went all the way down, and when they were at the bottom,
they were standing in a wonderfully pretty avenue of trees, all the
leaves of which were of silver, and shone and glistened. The soldier
thought, "I must carry a token away with me," and broke off a twig
from one of them, on which the tree cracked with a loud report.  The
youngest cried out again.  "Something is wrong, did you hear the
crack?" But the eldest said, "It is a gun fired for joy, because we
have got rid of our prince so quickly." After that they came into an
avenue where all the leaves were of gold, and lastly into a third
where they were of bright diamonds, he broke off a twig from each,
which made such a crack each time that the youngest started back in
terror, but the eldest still maintained that they were salutes.

They went on and came to a great lake whereon stood twelve little
boats, and in every boat sat a handsome prince, all of whom were
waiting for the twelve, and each took one of them with him, but the
soldier seated himself by the youngest.  Then her prince said, "I
wonder why the boat is so much heavier to-day. I shall have to row
with all my strength, if I am to get it across." "What should cause
that," said the youngest, "but the warm weather?" "I feel very warm
too." On the opposite side of the lake stood a splendid, brightly-lit
castle, from whence resounded the joyous music of trumpets and
kettle-drums.  They rowed there, entered, and each prince danced with
the girl he loved, but the soldier danced with them unseen, and when
one of them had a cup of wine in her hand he drank it up, so that the
cup was empty when she carried it to her mouth, the youngest was
alarmed at this, but the eldest always silenced her.  They danced
there till three o'clock in the morning when all the shoes were
danced into holes, and they were forced to leave off, the princes
rowed them back again over the lake, and this time the soldier seated
himself by the eldest.

On the shore they took leave of their princes, and promised to return
the following night.  When they reached the stairs the soldier ran on
in front and lay down in his bed, and when the twelve had come up
slowly and wearily, he was already snoring so loudly that they could
all hear him, and they said, "So far as he is concerned, we are
safe." They took off their beautiful dresses, laid them away, put the
worn-out shoes under the bed, and lay down.  Next morning the soldier
was resolved not to speak, but to watch the wonderful goings-on, and
again went with them a second and a third night.

Then everything was just as it had been the first time, and each time
they danced until their shoes were worn to pieces.  But the third
time he took a cup away with him as a token.  When the hour had
arrived for him to give his answer, he took the three twigs and the
cup, and went to the king, but the twelve stood behind the door, and
listened for what he was going to say.  When the king put the
question, "Where have my twelve daughters danced their shoes to
pieces in the night?" He answered, "In an underground castle with
twelve princes," and related how it had come to pass, and brought out
the tokens.  The king then summoned his daughters, and asked them if
the soldier had told the truth, and when they saw that they were
betrayed, and that falsehood would be of no avail, they were obliged
to confess all.  Thereupon the king asked which of them he would have
to wife.  He answered, "I am no longer young, so give me the eldest."
Then the wedding was celebrated on the self-same day, and the kingdom
was promised him after the king's death.  But the princes were
bewitched for as many days as they had danced nights with the twelve.
In olden times there lived an aged queen who was a sorceress, and her
daughter was the most beautiful maiden under the sun.  The old woman,
however, had no other thought than how to lure mankind to
destruction, and when a wooer appeared, she said that whosoever
wished to have her daughter, must first perform a task, or die.  Many
had been dazzled by the daughter's beauty, and had actually risked
this, but they never could accomplish what the old woman enjoined
them to do, and then no mercy was shown, they had to kneel down, and
their heads were struck off.

A certain king's son who had also heard of the maiden's beauty, said
to his father, "Let me go there, I want to demand her in marriage."
"Never," answered the king, "if you were to go, it would be going to
your death." On this the son lay down and was sick unto death, and
for seven years he lay there, and no physician could heal him. When
the father perceived that all hope was over, with a heavy heart he
said to him, "Go thither, and try your luck, for I know no other
means of curing you." When the son heard that, he rose from his bed
and was well again, and joyfully set out on his way.

And it came to pass that as he was riding across a heath, he saw from
afar something like a great heap of hay laying on the ground, and
when he drew nearer, he could see that it was the stomach of a man,
who had laid himself down there, but the stomach looked like a small
mountain.  When the fat man saw the traveler, he stood up and said,
"If you are in need of any one, take me into your service." The
prince answered, "What can I do with such a clumsy man?" "Oh," said
the stout one, "this is nothing, when I really puff myself up, I am
three thousand times fatter." "If that's the case," said the prince,
"I can make use of you, come with me."

So the stout one followed the prince, and after a while they found
another man who was lying on the ground with his ear laid to the
turf.  "What are you doing there?" asked the king's son.  "I am
listening," replied the man.  "What are you listening to so
attentively?" "I am listening to what is just going on in the world,
for nothing escapes my ears, I even hear the grass growing." "Tell
me," said the prince, "what you hear at the court of the old queen
who has the beautiful daughter." Then he answered, "I hear the
whizzing of the sword that is striking off a wooer's head." The
king's son said, "I can make use of you, come with me."

They went onwards, and then saw a pair of feet lying and part of a
pair of legs, but could not see the rest of the body.  When they had
walked on for a great distance, they came to the body, and at last to
the head also.  "Why," said the prince, "what a tall rascal you are."
"Oh," replied the tall one, "that is nothing at all yet, when I
really stretch out my limbs, I am three thousand times as tall, and
taller than the highest mountain on earth.  I will gladly enter your
service, if you will take me." "Come with me," said the prince, "I
can make use of you."

They went onwards and found a man sitting by the road who had bound
up his eyes.  The prince said to him, "Have you weak eyes, that you
cannot look at the light?" "No," replied the man, "but I must not
remove the bandage, for whatsoever I look at with my eyes, splits to
pieces, so powerful is my glance.  If you can use that, I shall be
glad to serve you." "Come with me," replied the king's son, "I can
make use of you."

They journeyed onwards and found a man who was lying in the hot
sunshine, trembling and shivering all over his body, so that not a
limb was still.  "How can you shiver when the sun is shining so
warm?" said the king's son.  "Alas," replied the man, "I am of quite
a different nature.  The hotter it is, the colder I am, and the frost
pierces through all my bones, and the colder it is, the hotter I am.
In the midst of ice, I cannot endure the heat, nor in the midst of
fire, the cold." "You are a strange fellow," said the prince, "but if
you will enter my service, follow me."

They traveled onwards, and saw a man standing who made a long neck
and looked about him, and could see over all the mountains.  "What
are you looking at so eagerly?" said the king's son.  The man
replied, "I have such sharp eyes that I can see into every forest and
field, and hill and valley, all over the world." The prince said,
"Come with me if you will, for I am still in want of such an one."

And now the king's son and his six servants came to the town where
the aged queen dwelt.  He did not tell her who he was, but said, "If
you will give me your beautiful daughter, I will perform any task you
set me." The sorceress was delighted to get such a handsome youth as
this into her net, and said, "I will set you three tasks, and if you
are able to perform them all, you shall be husband and master of my
daughter." "What is the first to be?" "You shall fetch me my ring
which I have dropped into the red sea."

So the king's son went home to his servants and said, "The first task
is not easy.  A ring is to be got out of the red sea.  Come, find
some way of doing it." Then the man with the sharp sight said, "I
will see where it is lying," and looked down into the water and said,
"It is hanging there, on a pointed stone." The tall one carried them
thither, and said, "I would soon get it out, if I could only see it."
"Oh, is that all," cried the stout one, and lay down and put his
mouth to the water, on which all the waves fell into it just as if it
had been a whirlpool, and he drank up the whole sea till it was as
dry as a meadow.  The tall one stooped down a little, and brought out
the ring with his hand.

Then the king's son rejoiced when he had the ring, and took it to the
old queen.  She was astonished, and said, "Yes, it is the right ring.
You have safely performed the first task, but now comes the second.
Do you see the meadow in front of my palace?  Three hundred fat oxen
are feeding there, and these must you eat, skin, hair, bones, horns
and all, and down below in my cellar lie three hundred casks of wine,
and these you must drink up as well, and if one hair of the oxen, or
one little drop of the wine is left, your life will be forfeited to
me." "May I invite no guests to this repast?" inquired the prince,
"No dinner is good without some company." The old woman laughed
maliciously, and replied, "You may invite one for the sake of
companionship, but no more."

The king's son went to his servants and said to the stout one, "You
shall be my guest to-day, and shall eat your fill." Hereupon the
stout one puffed himself up and ate the three hundred oxen without
leaving one single hair, and then he asked if he was to have nothing
but his breakfast.  Then he drank the wine straight from the casks
without feeling any need of a glass, and drained them down to their
dregs.

When the meal was over, the prince went to the old woman, and told
her that the second task also was performed.  She wondered at this
and said, "No one has ever done so much before, but one task still
remains," and she thought to herself, "You shall not escape me, and
will not keep your head on your shoulders." "This night," said she,
"I will bring my daughter to you in your chamber, and you shall put
your arms round her, but when you are sitting there together, beware
of falling asleep.  When twelve o'clock is striking, I will come, and
if she is then no longer in your arms, you are lost."

The prince thought, "The task is easy, I will most certainly keep my
eyes open." Nevertheless he called his servants, told them what the
old woman had said, and remarked, "Who knows what treachery lurks
behind this?  Foresight is a good thing - keep watch, and take
care that the maiden does not go out of my room again." When night
fell, the old woman came with her daughter, and gave her into the
princes's arms, and then the tall one wound himself round the two in
a circle, and the stout one placed himself by the door, so that no
living creature could enter.  There the two sat, and the maiden spoke
never a word, but the moon shone through the window on her face, and
the prince could behold her wondrous beauty.  He did nothing but gaze
at her, and was filled with love and happiness, and his eyes never
felt weary.  This lasted until eleven o'clock, when the old woman
cast such a spell over all of them that they fell asleep, and at the
self-same moment the maiden was carried away.

Then they all slept soundly until a quarter to twelve, when the magic
lost its power, and all awoke again.  "Oh, misery and misfortune,"
cried the prince, "now I am lost." The faithful servants also began
to lament, but the listener said, "Be quiet, I want to listen." Then
he listened for an instant and said, "She is on a rock, three hundred
leagues from hence, bewailing her fate.  You alone, tall one, can
help her, if you will stand up, you will be there in a couple of
steps."

"Yes," answered the tall one, "but the one with the sharp eyes must
go with me, that we may destroy the rock." Then the tall one took the
one with bandaged eyes on his back, and in the twinkling of an eye
they were on the enchanted rock.  The tall one immediately took the
bandage from the other's eyes, and he did but look round, and the
rock shivered into a thousand pieces. Then the tall one took the
maiden in his arms, carried her back in a second, then fetched his
companion with the same rapidity, and before it struck twelve they
were all sitting as they had sat before, quite merrily and happily.
When twelve struck, the aged sorceress came stealing in with a
malicious face, as much as to say, "Now he is mine, for she believed
that her daughter was on the rock three hundred leagues off." But
when she saw her in the prince's arms, she was alarmed, and said,
"Here is one who knows more than I do." She dared not make any
opposition, and was forced to give him her daughter.  But she
whispered in her ear, "It is a disgrace to you to have to obey common
people, and that you are not allowed to choose a husband to your own
liking."

On this the proud heart of the maiden was filled with anger, and she
meditated revenge.  Next morning she caused three hundred great
bundles of wood to be got together, and said to the prince that
though the three tasks were performed, she would still not be his
wife until someone was ready to seat himself in the midst of the
wood, and bear the fire.  She thought that none of his servants would
let themselves be burnt for him, and that out of love for her, he
himself would place himself upon it, and then she would be free.  But
the servants said, "Every one of us has done something except the
frosty one, he must set to work, and they put him in the middle of
the pile, and set fire to it." Then the fire began to burn, and burnt
for three days until all the wood was consumed, and when the flames
had burnt out, the frosty one was standing amid the ashes, trembling
like an aspen leaf, and saying, "I never felt such a frost during the
whole course of my life, if it had lasted much longer, I should have
been benumbed."

As no other pretext was to be found, the beautiful maiden was now
forced to take the unknown youth as a husband.  But when they drove
away to church, the old woman said, "I cannot endure the disgrace,"
and sent her warriors after them with orders to cut down all who
opposed them, and bring back her daughter.  But the listener had
sharpened his ears, and heard the secret discourse of the old woman.
"What shall we do?" said he to the stout one.  But he knew what to
do, and spat out once or twice behind the carriage some of the
sea-water which he had drunk, and a great lake arose in which the
warriors were caught and drowned.

When the sorceress perceived that, she sent her mailed knights, but
the listener heard the rattling of their armor, and undid the bandage
from one eye of sharp-eyes, who looked for a while rather fixedly at
the enemy's troops, on which they all sprang to pieces like glass.
Then the youth and the maiden went on their way undisturbed, and when
the two had been blessed in church, the six servants took leave, and
said to their master, "Your wishes are now satisfied, you need us no
longer, we will go our way and seek our fortunes."

Half a league from the palace of the prince's father was a village
near which a swineherd tended his herd, and when they came thither
the prince said to his wife, "Do you know who I really am?  I am no
prince, but a herder of swine, and the man who is there with that
herd, is my father.  We two shall have to set to work also, and help
him." Then he alighted with her at the inn, and secretly told the
innkeepers to take away her royal apparel during the night.  So when
she awoke in the morning, she had nothing to put on, and the
innkeeper's wife gave her an old gown and a pair of worsted
stockings, and at the same time seemed to consider it a great
present, and said, "If it were not for the sake of your husband I
should have given you nothing at all." Then the princess believed
that he really was a swineherd, and tended the herd with him, and
thought to herself, "I have deserved this for my haughtiness and
pride."

This lasted for a week, and then she could endure it no longer, for
she had sores on her feet.  And now came a couple of people who asked
if she knew who her husband was.  "Yes," she answered, "he is a
swineherd, and has just gone out with cords and ropes to try to drive
a little bargain." But they said, "Just come with us, and we will
take you to him," and they took her up to the palace, and when she
entered the hall, there stood her husband in kingly raiment.  But she
did not recognize him until he took her in his arms, kissed her, and
said, "I suffered so much for you that you, too, had to suffer for
me." And then the wedding was celebrated, and he who has related
this, wishes that he, too, had been present at it.
A woman was walking about the fields with her daughter and her
step-daughter cutting fodder, when the Lord came towards them in the
form of a poor man, and asked, "Which is the way into the village?"
"If you want to know," said the mother, "seek it for yourself," and
the daughter added, "If you are afraid you will not find it, take a
guide with you." But the step-daughter said, "Poor man, I will take
you there, come with me."

Then God was angry with the mother and daughter, and turned His back
on them, and wished that they should become as black as night and as
ugly as sin.  To the poor step-daughter, however, God was gracious,
and went with her, and when they were near the village, He said a
blessing over her, and spoke, "Choose three things for yourself, and
I will grant them to you." Then said the maiden, "I should like to be
as beautiful and fair as the sun," and instantly she was white and
fair as day.  "Then I should like to have a purse of money which
would never grow empty." That the Lord gave her also, but He said,
"Do not forget what is best of all." Said she, "For my third wish, I
desire, after my death, to inhabit the eternal kingdom of heaven."
That also was granted unto her, and then the Lord left her.

When the step-mother came home with her daughter, and they saw that
they were both as black as coal and ugly, but that the step-daughter
was white and beautiful, wickedness increased still more in their
hearts, and they thought of nothing else but how they could do her an
injury.  The step-daughter, however, had a brother called Reginer,
whom she loved much, and she told him all that had happened.  And
Reginer said to her, "Dear sister, I will paint your portrait, that I
may continually see you before my eyes, for my love for you is so
great that I should like always to look at you." Then she answered,
"But, I pray you, let no one see the picture."

So he painted his sister and hung up the picture in his room, he,
however, dwelt in the king's palace, for he was his coachman. Every
day he went and stood before the picture, and thanked God for the
happiness of having such a dear sister.  Now it happened that the
king whom he served, had just lost his wife, who had been so
beautiful that no one could be found to compare with her, and on this
account the king was in deep grief. The attendants about the court,
however, noticed that the coachman stood daily before this beautiful
picture, and they were jealous of him, so they informed the king.
Then the latter ordered the picture to be brought to him, and when he
saw that it was like his lost wife in every respect, except that it
was still more beautiful, he fell mortally in love with it He caused
the coachman to be brought before him, and asked whom the portrait
represented.  The coachman said it was his sister, so the king
resolved to take no one but her as his wife, and gave him a carriage
and horses and splendid garments of cloth of gold, and sent him forth
to fetch his chosen bride.

When Reginer came on this errand, his sister was glad, but the black
maiden was jealous of her good fortune, and grew angry above all
measure, and said to her mother, "Of what use are all your arts to us
now when you cannot procure such a piece of luck for me." "Be quiet,"
said the old woman, "I will soon divert it to you," - and by her arts
of witchcraft, she so troubled the eyes of the coachman that he was
half-blind, and she stopped the ears of the white maiden so that she
was half-deaf.  Then they got into the carriage, first the bride in
her noble royal apparel, then the step-mother with her daughter, and
Reginer sat on the box to drive.  When they had been on the way for
some time the coachman cried,
	 "Cover thee well, my sister dear,
	 That the rain may not wet thee,
	 That the wind may not load thee with dust,
	 That thou may'st be fair and beautiful
	 When thou appearest before the king."

The bride asked, "What is my dear brother saying?" "Ah," said the old
woman, "he says that you ought to take off your golden dress and give
it to your sister." Then she took it off, and put it on the black
maiden, who gave her in exchange for it a shabby grey gown.  They
drove onwards, and a short time afterwards, the brother again cried,
	 "Cover thee well, my sister dear,
	 That the rain may not wet thee,
	 That the wind may not load thee with dust,
	 That thou may'st be fair and beautiful
	 When thou appearest before the king."

The bride asked, "What is my dear brother saying?" "Ah," said the old
woman, "he says that you ought to take off your golden hood and give
it to your sister." So she took off the hood and put it on her
sister, and sat with her own head uncovered.  And they drove on
farther.  After a while, the brother once more cried,
	 "Cover thee well, my sister dear,
	 That the rain may not wet thee,
	 That the wind may not load thee with dust,
	 That thou may'st be fair and beautiful
	 When thou appearest before the king."

The bride asked, "What is my dear brother saying?" "Ah," said the old
woman, "he says you must look out of the carriage." They happened to
be on a bridge, which crossed deep water. When the bride stood up and
leant forward out of the carriage, they both pushed her out, and she
fell into the middle of the water.  At the same moment that she sank,
a snow-white duck arose out of the mirror-smooth water, and swam down
the river.

The brother had observed nothing of it, and drove the carriage on
until they reached the court.  Then he took the black maiden to the
king as his sister, and thought she really was so, because his eyes
were dim, and he saw the golden garments glittering.  When the king
saw the boundless ugliness of his intended bride, he was very angry,
and ordered the coachman to be thrown into a pit which was full of
adders and nests of snakes.  The old witch, however, knew so well how
to flatter the king and deceive his eyes by her arts, that he kept
her and her daughter until she appeared quite endurable to him, and
he really married her.

One evening when the black bride was sitting on the king's knee, a
white duck came swimming up the gutter to the kitchen, and said to
the kitchen-boy, "Boy, light a fire, that I may warm my feathers."
The kitchen-boy did it, and lighted a fire on the hearth.  Then came
the duck and sat down by it, and shook herself and smoothed her
feathers to rights with her bill. While she was thus sitting and
enjoying herself, she asked, "What is my brother Reginer doing?" The
scullery-boy replied, "He is imprisoned in the pit with adders and
with snakes." Then she asked, "What is the black witch doing in the
house?" The boy answered, "She is loved by the king and happy." "May
God have mercy on him," said the duck, and swam forth by the gutter.

The next night she came again and put the same questions, and the
third night also.  Then the kitchen-boy could bear it no longer, and
went to the king and revealed all to him.  The king, however, wanted
to see it for himself, and next evening went thither, and when the
duck thrust her head in through the gutter, he took his sword and cut
through her neck, and suddenly she changed into a most beautiful
maiden, exactly like the picture, which her brother had made of her.
The king was full of joy, and as she stood there quite wet, he caused
splendid apparel to be brought and had her clothed in it.

Then she told how she had been betrayed by cunning and falsehood, and
at last thrown down into the water, and her first request was that
her brother should be brought forth from the pit of snakes, and when
the king had fulfilled this request, he went into the chamber where
the old witch was, and asked if she knew the punishment for one who
does this and that, and related what had happened.  Then was she so
blinded that she was aware of nothing and said, "She deserves to be
stripped naked, and put into a barrel with nails, and that a horse
should be harnessed to the barrel, and the horse sent all over the
world." All of which was done to her, and to her black daughter.  But
the king married the white and beautiful bride, and rewarded her
faithful brother, and made him a rich and distinguished man.
***There was once upon a time a king who had a great forest near
his palace, full of all kinds of wild animals.  One day he sent
out a huntsman to shoot him a roe, but he did not come back.
Perhaps some accident has befallen him, said the king, and the
next day he sent out two more huntsmen who were to search for him,
but they too stayed away.  Then on the third day, he sent for all
his huntsmen, and said, scour the whole forest through, and do
not give up until you have found all three.  But of these also,
none came home again, and of the pack of hounds which they had
taken with them, none were seen again.  From that time forth,
no one would any longer venture into the forest, and it lay
there in deep stillness and solitude, and nothing was seen of it,
but sometimes an eagle or a hawk flying over it.  This lasted
for many years, when an unknown huntsman announced himself
to the king as seeking a situation, and offered to go into the
dangerous forest.  The king, however, would not give his consent,
and said, it is not safe in there, I fear it would fare with you
no better than with the others, and you would never come out
again.  The huntsman replied, lord, I will venture it at my own
risk, of fear I know nothing.
The huntsman therefore betook himself with his dog to the forest.
It was not long before the dog fell in with some game on the way,
and wanted to pursue it, but hardly had the dog run two steps
when it stood before a deep pool, could go no farther, and a
naked
arm stretched itself out of the water, seized it, and drew it
under.  When the huntsman saw that, he went back and fetched
three men to come with buckets and bale out the water.  When
they could see to the bottom there lay a wild man whose body
was brown like rusty iron, and whose hair hung over his face
down to his knees.  They bound him with cords, and led
him away to the castle.  There was great astonishment over the
wild man, the king, however, had him put in an iron cage in his
court-yard, and forbade the door to be opened on pain of death,
and the queen herself was to take the key into her keeping.
And from this time forth every one could again go into the
forest with safety.
The king had a son of eight years, who was once playing in the
court-yard, and while he was playing, his golden ball fell into
the cage.  The boy ran thither and said, give me my ball out.
Not till you have opened the door for me, answered the man.  No,
said the boy, I will not do that, the king has forbidden it,
and ran away.  The next day he again went and asked for his
ball.  The wild man said, open my
door, but the boy would not.  On the third day the king had
ridden out hunting, and the boy went once more and said, I
cannot open the door even if I wished, for I have not the key.
Then the wild man said, it lies under your mother's pillow,
you can get it there.  The boy, who wanted to have his ball back,
cast all thought to the winds, and brought the key.  The door
opened with difficulty, and the boy pinched his fingers.  When
it was open the wild man stepped out, gave him the golden ball,
and hurried away.  The boy had become afraid, he called and
cried after him, oh, wild man, do not go away, or I shall be
beaten.  The wild man turned back, took him up, set him on his
shoulder, and went with hasty steps into the forest.  When the
king came home, he observed the empty cage, and asked the queen
how that had happened.  She knew nothing about it, and sought the
key, but it was gone.  She called the boy, but no one answered.
The king sent out people to seek for him in the fields, but
they did not find him.  Then he could easily guess what had
happened, and much grief reigned in the royal court.
When the wild man had once more reached the dark forest, he
took the boy down from his shoulder, and said to him, you
will never see your father and mother again, but I will keep
you with me, for you have set me free, and I have compassion
on you.  If you do all I bid you, you shall fare well.  Of
treasure and gold have I enough, and more than anyone in the
world.  He made a bed of moss for the boy on which he slept,
and the next morning the man took him to a well, and said,
behold, the gold well is as bright and clear as crystal, you
shall sit beside it, and take care that nothing falls into
it, or it will be polluted.  I will come every evening to see if
you have obeyed my order.  The boy placed himself by the brink of
the well, and often saw a golden fish or a golden snake show
itself therein, and took care that nothing fell in.  As he was
thus sitting, his finger hurt him so violently that he
involuntarily put it in the water.  He drew it quickly out
again, but saw that it was quite gilded, and whatsoever pains
he took to wash the gold off again, all was to no purpose.  In
the evening iron Hans came back, looked at the boy, and said,
what has happened to the well.  Nothing,
nothing, he answered, and held his finger behind his back, that
the man might not see it.  But he said, you have dipped your
finger into the water, this time it may pass, but take care
you do not again let anything go in.  By daybreak the boy was
already sitting by the well and watching it.  His finger hurt
him again and he passed it over his head, and then unhappily
a hair fell down into the well.  He took it quickly out, but
it was already quite gilded.  Iron Hans came, and already knew
what had happened.  You have let a hair fall into the well,
said he.  I will allow you to watch by it once more, but if this
happens for the third time then the well is polluted, and you
can no longer remain with me.
On the third day, the boy sat by the well, and did not stir his
finger, however much it hurt him.  But the time was long to
him, and he looked at the reflection of his face on the surface
of the water.  And as he still bent down more and more while he
was doing so, and trying to look straight into the eyes, his
long hair fell down from his shoulders into the water.  He
raised himself up quickly, but the whole of the hair of his head
was already golden and shone like the sun.  You can imagine how
terrified the poor boy was.  He took his pocket-handkerchief
and tied it round his head, in order that the man might not
see it.  When he came he already knew everything, and said,
take the handkerchief off.  Then the golden hair streamed forth,
and let the boy excuse himself as he might, it was of no use.
You have not stood the trial, and can stay here no longer.  Go
forth into the world, there you will learn what poverty is.  But
as you have not a bad heart, and as I mean well by you, there is
one thing I will grant you.  If you fall into any difficulty,
come to the forest and cry, iron Hans, and then I will come and
help you.  My power is great, greater than you think, and I have
gold and silver in abundance.
Then the king's son left the forest, and walked by beaten and
unbeaten paths ever onwards until at length he reached a great
city.  There he looked for work, but could find none, and he
had learnt nothing by which he could help himself.  At length
he went to the palace, and asked if they would take him in.
The people about
court did not at all know what use they could make of him, but
they liked him, and told him to stay.  At length the cook took
him into his service, and said he might carry wood and water, and
rake the cinders together.  Once when it so happened that
no one else was at hand, the cook ordered him to carry the
food to the royal table, but as he did not like to let his
golden hair be seen, he kept his little cap on.  Such a thing
as that had never yet come under the king's notice, and he said,
when you come to the royal table you must take your hat off.  He
answered, ah, lord, I cannot.  I have a bad sore place on my
head.  Then the king had the cook called before him and scolded
him, and asked how he could take such a boy as that into his
service, and that he was to send him away at once.  The cook,
however, had pity on him, and exchanged him for the gardener's
boy.
And now the boy had to plant and water the garden, hoe and dig,
and bear the wind and bad weather.  Once in summer when he was
working alone in the garden, the day was so warm he took his
little cap off that the air might cool him.  As the sun shone
on his hair it glittered and flashed so that the rays fell into
the bed-room of the king's daughter, and up she sprang to
see what that could be.  Then she saw the boy, and cried to
him, boy, bring me a wreath of flowers.  He put his cap on
with all haste, and gathered wild field-flowers and bound them
together.  When he was ascending the stairs with them, the
gardener met him, and said, how can you take the king's daughter a
garland of such common flowers.  Go quickly, and get another,
and seek out the prettiest and rarest.  Oh, no, replied the
boy, the wild ones have more scent, and will please her better.
When he got into the room, the king's daughter said, take
your cap off, it is not seemly to keep it on in my presence.
He again said, I may not, I have a sore head.  She, however,
caught at his cap and pulled it off, and then his golden hair
rolled down on his shoulders, and it was splendid to behold.
He wanted to run out, but she held him by the arm, and gave him
a handful of ducats.  With these he departed, but he cared
nothing for the gold pieces.  He took them to the gardener, and
said, I present them to
your children, they can play with them.  The following day the
king's daughter again called to him that he was to bring her a
wreath of field-flowers, and when he went in with it, she
instantly snatched at his cap, and wanted to take it away from
him, but he held it fast with both hands.  She again gave him a
handful of ducats, but he would not keep them, and gave them
to the gardener for playthings for his children.  On the third
day things went just the same.  She could not get his cap away
from him, and he would not have her money.
Not long afterwards, the country was overrun by war.  The king
gathered together his people, and did not know whether or not
he could offer any opposition to the enemy, who was superior
in strength and had a mighty army.  Then said the gardener's boy,
I am grown up, and will go to the wars also, only give me a
I am grown up, and will go the the wars also, only give me a
horse.  The others laughed, and said, seek one for yourself when
we are gone, we will leave one behind us in the stable for you.
When they had gone forth, he went into the stable, and led the
horse out.  It was lame of one foot, and limped hobblety
jig, hobblety jig, nevertheless he mounted it, and rode away
to the dark forest.  When he came to the outskirts, he called
'iron Hans, three times so loudly that it echoed through the
trees.  Thereupon the wild man appeared immediately, and said,
what do you desire.  I want a strong steed, for I am going to the
wars.  That you shall have, and still more than you ask for.
Then the wild man went back into the forest, and it was not
long before a stable-boy came out of it, who led a horse that
snorted with its nostrils, and could hardly be restrained,
and behind them followed a great troop of warriors entirely
equipped in iron, and their swords flashed in the sun.  The
youth made over his three-legged horse to the stable-boy,
mounted the other, and rode at the head of the soldiers.  When
he got near the battle-field a great part of the king's men had
already fallen, and little was wanting to make the rest give way.
Then the youth galloped thither with his iron soldiers, broke
like a hurricane over the enemy, and beat down all who opposed
him.  They began to flee, but the youth pursued, and never
stopped, until there was not a single man left.  Instead
of returning to the king, however, he conducted his troop
by byways back to the forest, and called forth iron Hans.
What do you desire, asked the wild man.  Take back your horse and
your troops, and give me my three-legged horse again.  All
that he asked was done, and soon he was riding on his three-legged
horse.  When the king returned to his palace, his daughter went
to meet him, and wished him joy of his victory.  I am not the
one who carried away the victory, said he, but a strange knight
who came to my assistance with his soldiers.  The daughter
wanted to hear who the strange knight was, but the king did
not know, and said, he followed the enemy, and I did not see him
again.  She inquired of the gardener where his boy was, but he
smiled, and said, he has just come home on his three-legged
horse, and the others have been mocking him, and crying, here
comes our hobblety jig back again.  They asked, too, under
what hedge have you been lying sleeping all the time.  So he
said, I did the best of all, and it would have gone badly without
me.  And then he was still more ridiculed.
The king said to his daughter, I will proclaim a great feast
that shall last for three days, and you shall throw a golden
apple.  Perhaps the unknown man will show himself.  When the
feast was announced, the youth went out to the forest, and called
iron Hans.  What do you desire, asked he.  That I may catch the
king's daughter's golden apple.  It is as safe as if you had
it already, said iron Hans.  You shall likewise have a suit of
red armor for the occasion, and ride on a spirited chestnut-horse.
When the day came, the youth galloped to the spot, took his
place amongst the knights, and was recognized by no one.  The
king's daughter came forward, and threw a golden apple to the
knights, but none of them caught it but he, only as soon as he
had it he galloped away.
On the second day iron Hans equipped him as a white knight, and
gave him a white horse.  Again he was the only one who caught
the apple, and he did not linger an instant, but galloped
off with it.  The king grew angry, and said, that is not allowed.
He must appear before me and tell his name.  He gave the order
that if the knight who caught the apple, should go away again
they should
pursue him, and if he would not come back willingly, they were
to cut him down and stab him.
On the third day, he received from iron Hans a suit of black armor
and a black horse, and again he caught the apple.  But when he was
riding off with it, the king's attendants pursued him, and
one of them got so near him that he wounded the youth's leg
with the point of his sword.  The youth nevertheless escaped
from them, but his horse leapt so violently that the helmet fell
from the youth's head, and they could see that he had golden
hair.  They rode back and announced this to the king.
The following day the king's daughter asked the gardener about
his boy.  He is at work in the garden.  The queer creature has
been at the festival too, and only came home yesterday evening.
He has likewise shown my children three golden apples which he
has won.
The king had him summoned into his presence, and he came and again
had his little cap on his head.  But the king's daughter went up
to him and took it off, and then his golden hair fell down
over his shoulders, and he was so handsome that all were amazed.
Are you the knight who came every day to the festival, always in
different colors, and who caught the three golden apples, asked
the king.  Yes, answered he, and here the apples are, and he
took them out of his pocket, and returned them to the king.  If
you desire further proof, you may see the wound which your people
gave me when they followed me.  But I am likewise the knight
who helped you to your victory over your enemies.  If you can
perform such deeds as that, you are no gardener's boy, tell me,
who is your father.  My father is a mighty king, and gold have
I in plenty as great as I require.  I well see, said the king,
that I owe thanks to you, can I do anything to please you.  Yes,
answered he, that indeed you can.  Give me your daughter to wife.
The maiden laughed, and said, he does not stand much on ceremony,
but I have already seen by his golden hair that he was no
gardener's boy, and then she went and kissed him.  His father and
mother came to the wedding, and were in great delight, for they
had given up all
hope of ever seeing their dear son again.  And as they were sitting
at the marriage-feast, the music suddenly stopped, the doors
opened, and a stately king came in with a great retinue.  He went
up to the youth, embraced him and said, I am iron Hans, and was by
enchantment a wild man, but you have set me free.  All the
treasures which I possess, shall be your property.
East india was besieged by an enemy who would not retire until
he had received six hundred dollars.  Then the townsfolk caused
it to be proclaimed by beat of drum that whosoever was able to
procure the money should be burgomaster.  Now there was a poor
fisherman who fished on the sea with his son, and the enemy came
and took the son prisoner, and gave the father six hundred
dollars for him.  So the father went and gave them to the great
men of the town, and the enemy departed, and the fisherman became
burgomaster.  Then it was proclaimed that whosoever did not say
'mr. Burgomaster, should be put to death on the gallows.
The son got away again from the enemy, and came to a great
forest on a high mountain.  The mountain opened, and he went
into a great enchanted castle, wherein chairs, tables, and
benches were all hung with black.  Then came three young
princesses who were dressed entirely in black, but had a little
white on their faces.  They told him he was not to be afraid,
they would not hurt him, and that he could rescue them.  He
said he would gladly do that, if he did but know how.  At
this, they told him he must for a whole year not speak to them
and also not look at them, and what he wanted to have he was
just to ask for, and if they dared give him an answer they would
do so.  When he had been there for a long while he said
he should like to go to his father, and they told him he might
go.  He was to take with him this purse with money, put on this
coat, and in a week he must be back there again.
Then he was lifted up, and was instantly in east india.  He could
no longer find his father in the fisherman's hut, and asked the
people where the poor fisherman could be, and they told him he
must not say that, or he would come to the gallows.  Then he
went to his father and said, fisherman, how have you got here.
Then the father said, you must not say that, if the great men
of the town knew of that, you would come to the gallows.  He,
however, would not give in, and was brought to the gallows.
When he was there, he said, o, my masters, just give me leave to
go to the old fisherman's hut.  Then he put on his old smock, and
came back to the great men, and said, do you not now see.  Am I
not the son of the poor fisherman.  Did I not earn bread for my
father and mother in this dress.  Hereupon his father knew him
again, and begged his pardon, and took him home with him, and then
related all that had happened to him, and how he had got into a
forest on a high mountain, and the mountain had opened and he
had gone into an enchanted castle, where all was black, and three
young princesses had come to him who were black except a little
white on their faces.  And they had told him not to fear, and
that he could rescue them.  Then his mother said that might
very likely not be a good thing to do, and that he ought to take
a blessed candle with him, and drop some boiling wax on their
faces.
He went back again, and he was in great fear, and he dropped
the wax on their faces as they were sleeping, and they all
turned half-white.  Then all the three princesses sprang up, and
said, you accursed dog, our blood shall cry for vengeance on you.
Now there is no man born in the world, nor will any ever be born
who can set us free.  We have still three brothers who are bound
by seven chains - they shall tear you to pieces.  Then there was
a loud shrieking all over the castle, and he sprang out of the
window, and broke his leg, and the castle sank into the earth
again, the mountain closed again, and no one knew where the castle
had stood.
Between werrel and soist there lived a man whose name was knoist,
and he had three sons.  One was blind, the other lame, and the
third stark-naked.  Once on a time they went into a field,
and there they saw a hare.  The blind one shot it, the lame one
caught it, the naked one put it in his pocket.  Then they came to
a mighty big lake, on which there were three boats, one sailed,
one sank, the third had no bottom to it.  They all three got
into the one with no bottom to it.  Then they came to a mighty
big forest in which there was a mighty big tree, in the tree
was a mighty big chapel - in the chapel was a sexton made of
beech-wood and a box-wood parson, who dealt out holy water with
cudgels.
               How truly happy is that one
               who can from holy water run.
A girl from brakel once went to St. Anne's chapel at the foot
of the hinnenberg, and as she wanted to have a husband, and
thought there was no one else in the chapel, she sang,
               oh, holy saint anne.
               Help me soon to a man.
               Thou know'st him right well,
               by suttmer gate does he dwell,
               his hair it is yellow,
               thou know'st him right well.
The clerk, however, was standing behind the altar and heard
that, so he cried in a very gruff voice, you shall not have him.
You shall not have him.
The maiden thought that the child mary who stood by her mother
anne had called out that to her, and was angry, and cried,
fiddle de dee, conceited thing, hold your tongue, and let your
mother speak.
Whither do you go.  To walpe.  I to walpe, you to walpe, so,
so, together we'll go.
Have you a man.  What is his name.  Cham.  My man cham, your
man cham.  I to walpe, you to walpe, so, so, together we'll go.
Have you a child, how is he styled.  Wild.  My child wild, your
child wild, my man cham, your man cham.  I to walpe, you to
walpe, so, so, together we'll go.
Have you a cradle.  How do you call your cradle.  Hippodadle.  My
cradle hippodadle, your cradle hippodadle, my child wild, your
child wild, my man cham, your man cham.  I to walpe, you to
walpe, so, so, together we'll go.
Have you also a drudge.  What name has your drudge.
From-work-do-not-budge.  My drudge from-work-do-not-budge, your
drudge from-work-do-not-budge, my cradle hippodadle, your cradle
hippodadle, my child wild, your child wild, my man cham, your
man cham.  I to walpe, you to walpe, so, so, together we'll go.
There were once a little brother and a little sister, who loved
each other with all their hearts.  Their own mother, however, was
dead, and they had a step-mother who was not kind to them, and
secretly did everything she could to hurt them.  It so happened
that the two were playing with other children in a meadow before
the house, and there was a pond in the meadow which came up
to one side of the house.  The children ran about it, and caught
each other, and played at counting out.
          Eneke beneke, let me live,
          and I to you my bird will give.
          The little bird, it straw shall seek,
          the straw I'll give to the cow to eat.
          The pretty cow shall give me milk,
          the milk I'll to the baker take.
          The baker he shall bake a cake,
          the cake I'll give unto the cat.
          The cat shall catch some mice for that,
          the mice I'll hang up in the smoke,
          and then you'll see the snow.
They stood in a circle while they played this, and the one to
whom the word snow fell, had to run away and all the others ran
after him and caught him.  As they were running about so merrily
the step-mother watched them from the window, and grew angry.
And as she understood arts of witchcraft she bewitched them both,
and changed the little brother into a fish, and the little sister
into a lamb.  Then the fish swam here and there about the pond and
was very sad, and the lambkin walked up and down the meadow,
and was miserable, and could not eat or touch one blade of grass.
Thus
passed a long time, and then strangers came as visitors to the
castle.  The false step-mother thought, this is a good opportunity,
and called the cook and said to him, go and fetch the lamb from
the meadow and kill it, we have nothing else for the visitors.
Then the cook went away and got the lamb, and took it into the
kitchen and tied its feet, and all this it bore patiently.  When
he had drawn out his knife and was whetting it on the door-step
to kill the lamb, he noticed a little fish swimming backwards
and forwards in the water, in front of the gutter-stone and
looking up at him.  This, however, was the brother, for when the
fish saw the cook take the lamb away, it followed them and swam
along the pond to the house, then the lamb cried down to it,
          ah, brother, in the pond so deep,
          how sad is my poor heart.
          The cook he whets his knife
          to take away my life.
The little fish answered,
          ah, little sister, up on high
          how sad is my poor heart
          while in this pond I lie.
When the cook heard that the lambkin could speak and said such
sad words to the fish down below, he was terrified and thought
this could be no common lamb, but must be bewitched by the wicked
woman in the house.  Then said he, be easy, I will not kill you,
and took another sheep and made it ready for the guests, and
conveyed the lambkin to a good peasant woman, to whom he related
all that he had seen and heard.
The peasant, however, was the very woman who had been foster-mother
to the little sister, and she suspected at once who the
lamb was, and went with it to a wise woman.  Then the wise woman
pronounced a blessing over the lambkin and the little fish, by
means of which they regained their human forms, and after this
she took them both into a little hut in a great forest, where
they lived alone, but were contented and happy.
There were once two brothers, the one rich, the other poor.
The rich one, however, gave nothing to the poor one, and he
gained a scanty living by trading in corn, and often did so
badly that he had no bread for his wife and children.  Once
when he was wheeling a barrow through the forest he saw, on
one side of him, a great, bare, naked-looking mountain, and as he
had never seen it before, he stood still and stared at it with
amazement.
While he was thus standing he saw twelve great, wild men coming
towards him, and as he believed they were robbers he pushed his
barrow into the thicket, climbed up a tree, and waited to see
what would happen.  The twelve men, however, went to the
mountain and cried, semsi mountain, semsi mountain, open up, and
immediately the barren mountain opened down the middle, and
the twelve went into it, and as soon as they were within, it
shut.  After a short time, it opened again, and the men came
forth carrying heavy sacks on their shoulders, and when they
were all once more in the daylight they said, semsi mountain,
semsi mountain, shut yourself, then the mountain closed
together, and there was no longer any entrance to be seen to it,
and the twelve went away.
When they were quite out of sight the poor man got down from
the tree, and was curious to know what was secretly hidden in
the mountain.  So he went up to it and said, semsi mountain,
semsi mountain, open up, and the mountain opened up to him also.
Then he went inside, and the whole mountain was a cavern full of
silver and gold, and behind lay great piles of pearls and
sparkling jewels, heaped up like corn.  The poor man hardly knew
what to do, and whether he might take any of these treasures for
himself or not.  At last he filled his pockets with gold, but
he left the pearls and precious stones where they were.  When he
came out again he also said, semsi mountain, semsi mountain,
shut yourself, and the mountain closed itself, and he went home
with his barrow.
And now he had no more cause for anxiety, but could buy bread
for his wife and children with his gold, and wine into the bargain.
He lived joyously and honorably, gave help to the poor, and did
good to every one.  When the money came to an end, however, he
went to his brother, borrowed a measure that held a bushel,
and brought himself some more, but did not touch any of the
most valuable things.  When for the third time he wanted to
fetch something, he again borrowed the measure of his brother.
But the rich man had long been envious of his brother's
possessions, and of the handsome household which he kept up,
and could not understand from whence the riches came, and what his
brother wanted with the measure.  Then he thought of a cunning
trick, and covered the bottom of the measure with pitch, and when
he got the measure back a piece of gold was sticking to it.  He
at once went to his brother and asked him, what have you been
measuring in the bushel measure.  Corn and barley, said the other.
Then he showed him the piece of gold and threatened that if he did
not tell
the truth he would accuse him before a court of justice.  The poor
man then told him everything, just as it had happened.  So the
rich man ordered his carriage to be made ready, and drove away,
resolved to use the opportunity better than his brother had
done, and to bring back with him quite different treasures.
When he came to the mountain he cried, semsi mountain, semsi
mountain, open up.  The mountain opened, and he went inside it.
There lay the treasures all before him, and for a long time he
did not know which to grab first.  At length he loaded himself
with as many precious stones as he could carry.  He wished to
carry his burden outside, but as his heart and soul were entirely
full of the treasures, he had forgotten the name of the mountain,
and cried, simeli mountain, simeli mountain, open up.  That,
however, was not the right name, and the mountain never stirred,
but remained shut.  Then he was alarmed, and the longer he
thought about it the more his thoughts confused themselves, and
all his treasures were of no help to him.  In the evening the
mountain opened, and the twelve robbers came in, and when they
saw him they laughed, and cried out, bird, have we caught you
at last.  Did you think we had never noticed that you had
been in here twice.  We could not catch you then, this third
time you shall not get out again.  Then he cried, it was not I,
it was my brother, but let him beg for his life and say what he
would, they cut off his head.
There was once a poor woman who had a son, who much wished to
travel, but his mother said, how can you travel.  We have no money
at all for you to take away with you.  Then said the son, I will
manage very well for myself.  I will always say, not much, not
much, not much.
So he walked for a long time and always said, not much, not
much, not much.  Then he passed by a company of fishermen and said,
God speed you.  Not much, not much, not much.  What do you say,
churl, not much.  And when the net was drawn out they had not
caught much fish.  So one of them fell on the youth with a stick and
said, have you never seen me threshing.  What ought I to say,
then, asked the youth.  You must say - get it full, get it full.
After this he again walked a long time, and said, get it full, get
it full, until he came to the gallows, where they had got a poor
sinner whom they were about to hang.  Then said he, good morning,
get it full, get it full.  What do you say, knave, get it full.  Do
you want to make out that there are still more wicked people
in the world.  Is not this enough.  And he again got some blows
on his back.  What am I to say, then, said he.  You must say, may
God have pity on the poor soul.
Again the youth walked on for along while and said, may God have
pity on the poor soul.  Then he came to a pit by which stood a
knacker who was cutting up a horse.  The youth said, good
morning.  God have pity on the poor soul.  What do you say,
you ill-tempered knave, and the knacker gave him such a box on
the ear, that he could not see out of his eyes.  What am I to say,
then.  You must say, let the carrion lie in the pit.
So he walked on, and always said, let the carrion lie in the
pit, let the carrion lie in the pit.  And he came to a cart full
of people, so he said, good morning, let the carrion lie in the
pit.  Then the cart fell into a pit, and the driver took his
whip and cracked it upon the youth, till he was forced to crawl
back to his mother, and as long as he lived he never went out a
traveling again.
Once upon a time there lived a king and a queen, who were rich,
and had everything they wanted, but no children.  The queen
lamented over this day and night, and said, I am like a field
on which nothing grows.  At last God gave her her wish, but when
the child came into the world, it did not look like a human child,
but was a little donkey.  When the mother saw that, her lamentations
and outcries began in real earnest.  She said she would
far rather have had no child at all than have a donkey, and that
they were to throw it into the water that the fishes might devour
it.  But the king said, no, since God has sent him he shall be my
son and heir, and after my death sit on the royal throne, and
wear the kingly crown.  The donkey, therefore, was brought up
and grew bigger, and his ears grew up high and straight.  And he
was of a merry disposition, jumped about, played and took especial
pleasure in music, so that he went to a celebrated musician and
said, teach me your art, that I may play the lute as well as you do.
Ah, dear little master, answered the musician, that would come
very hard to you, your fingers are not quite suited to it, and
are far too big.  I am afraid the strings would not last.  But
no excuses were of any use.  The donkey was determined to play the
lute.  And since he was persevering and industrious, he at last
learnt to do it as well as the master himself.  The young lordling
once went out walking full of thought and came to a well.  He
looked into it and in the mirror-clear water saw his donkey's
form.  He was so distressed about it, that he went out into the
wide world and only took with him one faithful companion.  They
traveled up and down, and at last they came into a kingdom where
and old king reigned who had
a single but wonderfully beautiful daughter.  The donkey said,
here we will stay, knocked at the gate, and cried, a guest is
without.  Open, that he may enter.  When the gate was not opened,
he sat down, took his lute and played it in the most delightful
manner with his two fore-feet.  Then the door-keeper opened his
eyes, and gaped, and ran to the king and said, outside by the
gate sits a young donkey which plays the lute as well as an
experienced master.  Then let the musician come to me, said the
king.  But when a donkey came in, everyone began to laugh at the
lute-player.  And when the donkey was asked to sit down and eat
with the servants, he was unwilling, and said, I am no common
stable-ass, I
am a noble one.  Then they said, if that is what you are, seat
yourself with the soldiers.  No, said he, I will sit by the king.
The king smiled, and said good-humoredly, yes, it shall be as
you will, little ass, come here to me.  Then he asked, little ass,
how does my daughter please you.  The donkey turned his head
towards her, looked at her, nodded and said, I like her above
measure, I have never yet seen anyone so beautiful as she is.
Well, then, you shall sit next her too, said the king.  That is
exactly what I wish, said the donkey, and he placed himself by her
side, ate and drank, and knew how to behave himself daintily
and cleanly.  When the noble beast had stayed a long time at the
king's court, he thought, what good does all this do me, I
shall still have to go home again, let his head hang sadly,
and went to the king and asked for his dismissal.  But the king
had grown fond of him, and said, little ass, what ails you.  You
look as sour as a jug of vinegar, I will give you what you want.
Do you want gold.  No, said the donkey, and shook his head.
Do you want jewels and rich dress.  No.  Do you wish for half my
kingdom.  Indeed, no.  Then said the king, if I did but know what
would make you content.  Will you have my pretty daughter to wife.
Ah, yes, said the ass, I should indeed like her, and all at once
he became quite merry and full of happiness, for that was exactly
what he was wishing for.  So a great and splendid wedding was
held.  In the evening, when the bride and bridegroom were led
into their bed-room, the king wanted to know if the ass would
behave well, and ordered a servant to hide himself there.  When
they were both within, the bridegroom bolted the door, looked
around, and as he believed that they were quite alone, he suddenly
threw off his ass's skin, and stood there in the form of a handsome
royal youth.  Now, said he, you see who I am, and see also that
I am not unworthy of you.  Then the bride was glad, and kissed
him, and loved him dearly.  When morning came, he jumped up, put
his animal's skin on again, and no one could have guessed
what kind of a form was hidden beneath it.  Soon came the old king.
Ah, cried he, so the little ass is already up.  But surely you are
sad, said he to his daughter, that you have not got a proper
man for your husband.  Oh, no, dear father, I love him as well as
if he were the handsomest in the world, and I will keep him as long
as I live.  The king was surprised, but the servant who had
concealed himself came and revealed everything to him.  The king
said, that cannot be true.  Then watch yourself the next night,
and you will see it with your own eyes, and hark you, lord king,
if you were to take his skin away and throw it in the fire, he
would be forced to show himself in his true shape.  Your advice is
good, said the king, and at night when they were asleep, he stole
in, and when he got to the bed he saw by the light of the moon
a noble-looking youth lying there, and the skin lay stretched on
the ground.  So he took it away, and had a great fire lighted
outside, and threw the skin into it, and remained by it himself
until it was all burnt to ashes.  But since he was anxious to know
how the robbed man would behave himself, he stayed awake the whole
night and watched.  When the youth had slept his fill, he got
up by the first light of morning, and wanted to put on the
ass's skin, but it was not to be found.  At this he was alarmed,
and, full of grief and anxiety, said, now I shall have to contrive
to escape.  But when he went out, there stood the king, who said,
my son, whither away in such haste.  What have you in mind.  Stay
here, you are such a handsome man, you shall not go away from me.
I will now give you half my kingdom, and after my death you shall
have the whole of it.  Then I hope that what begins so well may
end well, and I will stay with you, said the youth.  And the old
man gave him half the kingdom, and in a year's time, when he died,
the youth had the whole, and after the death of his father he had
another kingdom as well, and lived in all magnificence.
A man and his wife were once sitting by the door of their house,
and they had a roasted chicken set before them, and were about
to eat it together.  Then the man saw that his aged father was
coming, and hastily took the chicken and hid it, for he would
not permit him to have any of it.  The old man came, took a drink,
and went away.  Now the son wanted to put the roasted chicken on
the table again, but when he took it up, it had become a great
toad, which jumped into his face and sat there and never went
away again, and if any one wanted to take it off, it looked
venomously at him as if it would jump in his face, so that no
one would venture to touch it.  And the ungrateful son was forced
to feed the toad every day, or else it fed itself on his face,
and thus he went about the world knowing no rest.
There were once two brothers who both served as soldiers, one of
them was rich, and the other poor.  Then the poor one, to escape
from his poverty, doffed his soldier's coat, and turned farmer.
He dug and hoed his bit of land, and sowed it with turnip-seed.
The seed came up, and one turnip grew there which became large and
strong, and visibly grew bigger and bigger, and seemed as if it
would never stop growing, so that it might have been called the
princess of turnips, for never was such an one seen before, and
never will such an one be seen again.
At length it was so enormous that by itself it filled a whole
cart, and two oxen were required to draw it, and the farmer had
not the least idea what he was to do with the turnip, or whether
it would be a fortune to him or a misfortune.  At last he thought,
if you sell it, what will you get for it that is of any importance,
and if you eat it yourself, why, the small turnips would do you
just as much good.  It would be better to take it to the king, and
make him a present of it.
So he placed it on a cart, harnessed two oxen, took it to the
palace, and presented it to the king.  What strange thing is
this, said the king.  Many wonderful things have come before my
eyes, but never such a monster as this.  From what seed can this
have sprung, or are you a favorite of good fortune and have met
with it by chance.  Ah, no, said the farmer, no favorite
am I.  I am a poor soldier, who because he could no longer
support himself hung his soldier's coat on a nail and took to
farming land.  I have a brother who is rich and well known to you,
lord king, but I, because I have nothing, am forgotten by everyone.
Then the king felt compassion for him, and said, you shall be
raised from your poverty, and shall have such gifts from me that
you shall be equal to your rich brother.  Then he bestowed
on him much gold, and lands, and meadows, and herds, and made him
immensely rich, so that the wealth of the other brother could
not be compared with his.  When the rich brother heard what the
poor one had gained for himself with one single turnip, he
envied him, and thought in every way how he also could come by a
similar piece of luck.  He set about it in a much more cunning
way, however, and took gold and horses and carried them to the
king, and made certain the king would give him a much larger
present in return.  If his brother had got so much for one
turnip, what would he not carry away with him in return for such
beautiful things as these.  The king accepted his present, and
said he had nothing to give him in return that was more rare and
excellent than the great turnip.  So the rich man was obliged to
put his brother's turnip in a cart and have it taken to his home.
There, he did not know on whom to vent his rage and anger, until
bad thoughts came to him, and he resolved to kill his brother.
He hired murderers, who were to lie in ambush, and then he went
to his brother and said, dear brother, I know of a hidden
treasure, we will dig it up together, and divide it between us.
The other agreed to this, and accompanied him without suspicion.
While they were on their way the murderers fell on him, bound
him, and would have hanged him to a tree.  But just as they were
doing this, loud singing and the sound of a horse's feet were
heard in the distance.  On this their hearts were filled with
terror, and they pushed their prisoner hastily into the sack, hung
it on a branch, and took to flight.  He, however, worked up there
until he had made a hole in the sack through which he could put his
head.  The man who was coming by was no other than a traveling
student, a young fellow who rode on his way through the wood
joyously singing his song.  When he who was aloft saw that someone
was passing below him, he cried, good day.  You have come at
a lucky moment.  The student looked round on every side, but did
not know whence the voice came.  At last he said, who calls
me.  Then an answer came from the top of the tree, raise your
eyes, here I sit aloft in the sack of wisdom.  In a short time
have I learnt great things, compared with this all schools are
a jest, in a very short time I shall have learnt everything, and
shall descend wiser than all other men.  I understand the stars,
and the tracks of the winds, the sand of the sea, the healing of
illness, and the virtues of all herbs, birds and stones.  If
you were once within it you would feel what noble things issue
forth from the sack of knowledge.
The student, when he heard all this, was astonished, and said,
blessed be the hour in which I have found you.  May not I also
enter the sack for a while.  He who was above replied as if
unwillingly, for a short time I will let you get into it, if
you reward me and give me good words, but you must wait an hour
longer, for one thing remains which I must learn before I do it.
When the student had waited a while he became impatient, and begged
to be allowed to get in at once, his thirst for knowledge was
so very great.  So he who was above pretended
at last to yield, and said, in order that I may come forth from
the house of knowledge you must let it down by the rope, and
then you shall enter it.  So the student let the sack down,
untied it, and set him free, and then cried, now draw me up at
once, and was about to get into the sack.  Halt, said the other,
that won't do, and took him by the head and put him upside down
into the sack, fastened it, and drew the disciple of wisdom up
the tree by the rope.  Then he swung him in the air and said, how
goes it with you, my dear fellow.  Behold, already you feel wisdom
coming, and you are gaining valuable experience.  Keep perfectly
quiet until you become wiser.  Thereupon he mounted the student's
horse and rode away, but in an hour's time sent someone to let
the student out again.
At the time when our Lord still walked this earth, he and St.
Peter stopped one evening at a smith's and received free
quarters.  Then it came to pass that a poor beggar, hard pressed
by age and infirmity, came to this house and begged alms of the
smith.  St. Peter had compassion on him and said, Lord and
master, if it please you, cure his torments that he may be able
to win his own bread.  The Lord said kindly, smith, lend me your
forge, and put on some coals for me, and then I will make this
ailing old man young again.  The smith was quite willing, and
St. Peter blew the bellows, and when the coal fire sparkled up
large and high our Lord took the little old man, pushed him in
the forge in the midst of the red-hot fire, so that he glowed like
a rose-bush, and praised God with a loud voice.  After that the
Lord went to the quenching tub, put the glowing little man into
it so that the water closed over
him, and after he had carefully cooled him, gave him his blessing,
when behold the little man sprang nimbly out, looking fresh,
straight, healthy, and as if he were but twenty.  The smith, who
had watched everything closely and attentively, invited them
all to supper.  He, however, had an old half-blind crooked,
mother-in-law who went to the youth, and with great earnestness
asked if the fire had burnt him much.  He answered that he had never
felt more comfortable, and that he had sat in the red heat
as if he had been in cool dew.  The youth's words echoed in the
ears of the old woman all night long, and early next morning,
when the Lord had gone on his way again and had heartily thanked
the smith, the latter thought he might make his old mother-in-law
young again likewise, as he had watched everything so carefully,
and it lay in the province of his trade.  So he called to ask her
if she, too, would like to go bounding about like a girl of
eighteen.  She said, with all my heart, as the youth has come
out of it so well.  So the smith made a great fire, and thrust
the old woman into it, and she writhed about this way and that,
and uttered terrible cries of murder.  Sit still.  Why are
you screaming and jumping about so, cried he, and as he spoke
he blew the bellows again until all her rags were burnt.  The
old woman cried without ceasing, and the smith thought to himself,
I have not quite the right art, and took her out and threw her
into the cooling-tub.  Then she screamed so loudly that the smith's
wife upstairs and her daughter-in-law heard it, and they both
ran downstairs, and saw the old woman lying in a heap in the
quenching-tub, howling and screaming, with her face wrinkled and
shriveled and all out of shape.  Thereupon the two, who were
both with child, were so terrified that that very night two
boys were born who were not made like men but apes, and they ran
into the woods, and from them sprang the race of apes.
A certain king had three sons who were all equally dear to
him, and he did not know which of them to appoint as his successor
after his own death.  When the time came when he was about to
die, he summoned them to his bedside and said, dear children,
I have been thinking of something which I will declare unto
you, whichsoever of you is the laziest shall have the kingdom.
The eldest said, then, father, the kingdom is mine, for I am so
idle that if I lie down to rest, and a drop falls in my eye,
I will not open it that I may sleep.  The second said, father,
the kingdom belongs to me, for I am so idle that when I am
sitting by the fire warming myself, I would rather let my heel
be burnt off than draw back my leg.  The third said, father,
the kingdom is mine, for I am so idle that if I were going to
be hanged, and had the rope already round my neck, and any one
put a sharp knife into my hand with which I might cut the rope,
I would rather let myself be hanged than raise my hand to the rope.
When the father heard that, he said, you have carried it the
farthest, and shall be king.
There was once upon a time a shepherd boy whose fame spread
far and wide because of the wise answers which he gave to every
question.  The king of the country heard of it likewise, but
did not believe it, and sent for the boy.  Then he said to
him, if you can give me an answer to three questions which I
will ask you, I will look on you as my own child, and you shall
dwell with me in my royal palace.  The boy said, what are the
three questions.  The king said, the first is, how many drops
of water are there in the ocean.  The shepherd boy answered, lord
king, if you will have all the rivers on earth dammed up so that
not a single drop runs from them into the sea until I have
counted it, I will tell you how many drops there are in the sea.
The king said, the next question is, how many stars are there
in the sky.  The shepherd boy said, give me a great sheet of
white paper, and then he made so many fine points on it with a
pen that they could
scarcely be seen, and it was all but impossible to count them,
any one who looked at them would have lost his sight.  Then he
said, there are as many stars in the sky as there are points
on the paper.  Just count them.  But no one was able to do it.
The king said, the third question is, how many seconds of time
are there in eternity.  Then said the shepherd boy, in
lower pomerania is the diamond mountain, which is two miles
high, two miles wide, and two miles deep.  Every hundred
years a little bird comes and sharpens its beak on it, and
when the whole mountain is worn away by this, then the first
second of eternity will be over.
The king said, you have answered the three questions like a
wise man, and shall henceforth dwell with me in my royal
palace, and I will regard you as my own child.
There was once upon a time a little girl whose father and mother
were dead, and she was so poor that she no longer had a room to
live in, or bed to sleep in, and at last she had nothing else but
the clothes she was wearing and a little bit of bread in her
hand which some charitable soul had given her.  She was good and
pious, however.  And as she was thus forsaken by all the world,
she went forth into the open country, trusting in the good God.
Then a poor man met her, who said, ah, give me something to eat,
I am so hungry.  She handed him the whole of her piece of bread,
and said, may God bless you, and went onwards.  Then came a child
who moaned and said, my head is so cold, give me something to
cover it with.  So she took off her hood and gave it to him.  And
when she had walked a little farther, she met another child who
had no jacket and was frozen with cold.  Then she gave it her
own, and a little farther on one begged for a frock,
and she gave away that also.  At length she got into a forest
and it had already become dark, and there came yet another child,
and asked for a shirt, and the good little girl thought
to herself, it is a dark night and no one sees you, you can very
well give your shirt away, and took it off, and gave away that
also.  And as she so stood, and had not one single thing left,
suddenly some stars from heaven fell down, and they were nothing
else but hard smooth pieces of money, and although she had just
given her shirt away, she had a new one which was of the very
finest linen.  Then she put the money into it, and was rich all
the days of her life.
A father was one day sitting at dinner with his wife and his
children, and a good friend who had come on a visit ate with
them.  And as they thus sat, and it was striking twelve o'clock,
the stranger saw the door open, and a very pale child dressed
in snow-white clothes came in.  It did not look around, and it
did not speak, but went straight into the next room.  Soon
afterwards it came back, and went out at the door again in the
same quiet manner.  On the second and on the third day, it came
also exactly in the same way.  At last the stranger asked the
father to whom the beautiful child that went into the next room
every day at noon belonged.  I have never seen it, said he,
neither did he know to whom it could belong.  The next day when
it again came, the stranger pointed it out to the father, who
however did not see it, and the mother and the children also
all saw nothing.  At this the stranger got up, went to the room
door, opened it a little, and peeped in.  Then he saw the child
sitting on the ground, and busily digging and seeking about
between the boards of the floor, but
when it saw the stranger, it disappeared.  He now told what
he had seen and described the child exactly, and the mother
recognized it, and said, ah, it is my dear child who died a
month ago.  They took up the boards and found two farthings
which the child had once received from its mother that it
might give them to a poor man.  It, however, had thought, you
can buy yourself a biscuit for that, and had kept the farthings,
and hidden them in the openings between the boards.  And therefore
it had had no rest in its grave, and had come every day at noon
to seek for these farthings.  The parents gave the money at
once to a poor man, and after that the child was never seen again.
There was once a young shepherd who wanted very much to marry,
and was acquainted with three sisters who were all equally pretty,
so that it was difficult for him to make a choice, and he could
not decide to give the preference to any one of them.  Then he
asked his mother for advice, and she said, invite all three,
and set some cheese before them, and watch how they eat it.  The
youth did so, the first swallowed the cheese with the rind on,
the second hastily cut the rind off the cheese, but she cut
it so quickly that she left much good cheese with it, and threw
that away also, the third peeled the rind off carefully, and cut
neither too much nor too little.  The shepherd told all this to
his mother, who said, take the third for your wife.  This he did,
and lived contentedly and happily with her.
A sparrow had four young ones in a swallow's nest.  When they
were fledged, some naughty boys pulled out the nest, but
fortunately all the birds got safely away in the high wind.  Then
the old bird was grieved that as his sons had all gone out into
the world, he had not first warned them of every kind of danger,
and given them good instruction how to deal with each.
In the autumn a great many sparrows assembled together in a
wheatfield, and there the old bird met his four children again,
and full of joy took them home with him.  Ah, my dear sons, how
I have been worrying about you all through the summer, because you
got away in the wind without my teaching.  Listen to my words,
obey your father, and be well on your guard.  Little birds have
to encounter great dangers.  And then he asked the eldest where
he had spent the summer, and how he had supported himself.  I
stayed in the gardens, and looked for caterpillars and small worms,
until the cherries were ripe.  Ah, my son, said the father,
tit-bits
are not bad, but there is great risk about them.  On that account
take great care of yourself henceforth, and particularly when
people are going about the gardens who carry long green poles
which are hollow inside and have a little hole at the top.  Yes,
father, but what if a little green leaf is stuck over the hole
with wax, said the son.  Where have you seen that.  In a
merchant's garden, said the youngster.  Oh, my son, merchant folks
are smart folks, said the father.  If you have been among the
children of the world, you have learned worldly craftiness enough,
only see that you use it well, and do not be too confident.
Then he asked the next, where have you passed your time.  At
court, said the son.  Sparrows and silly little birds are of
no use in that place.  There one finds much gold, velvet, silk,
armor, harnesses, sparrow-hawks, screech-owls and lanners.  Keep
to the horses, stable where they winnow oats, or thresh, and
then fortune may give you your daily grain of corn in peace.  Yes,
father, said the son, but when the stable-boys make traps and fix
their gins and snares in the straw, many a one is caught.
Where have you seen that, said the old bird.  At court, among the
stable-boys.  Oh, my son, court boys are bad boys.  If you
have been to court and among the lords, and have left no feathers
there, you have learnt a fair amount, and will know very well
how to go about the world, but look around you and above you,
for the wolves often devour the wisest dogs.
The father examined the third also, where did you seek your
fortune.  I have cast my tub and rope on the cart-roads and
highways, and sometimes met with a grain of corn or barley.  That
is indeed dainty fare, said the father, but take care what you
are about and look carefully around, especially when you see
anyone stooping and about to pick up a stone, for then
you have not much time to waste.  That is true, said the son,
but what if anyone should carry a bit of rock, or ore, ready
beforehand in his breast or pocket.  Where have you seen that.
Among the miners, dear father.  When they get out of the pit,
they generally take little bits of ore with them.  Mining folks
are working folks, and clever folks.
If you have been among mining lads, you have seen and learnt
something, but when you go thither beware, for many a sparrow
has been brought to a bad end by a mining boy throwing a piece
of cobalt.
At length the father came to the youngest son, you, my dear
chirping nestling, were always the silliest and weakest.  Stay
with me, the world has many rough, wicked birds which have
crooked beaks and long claws, and lie in wait for poor little
birds and swallow them.  Keep with those of your own kind, and
pick up little spiders and caterpillars from the trees, or the
houses, and then you will live long in peace.  My dear father,
he who feeds himself without injury to other people fares well,
and no sparrow-hawk, eagle, or kite will hurt him if he commits
himself and his lawful food, evening and morning, faithfully to
God, who is the creator and preserver of all forest and village
birds, who likewise heareth the cry and prayer of the young
ravens, for no sparrow or wren ever falls to the ground except
by his will.  Where have you learnt this.  The son answered,
when the great blast of wind tore me away from you I came to a
church, and there during the summer I have picked up the flies
and spiders from the windows, and heard this discourse preached.
The father of all sparrows fed me all the
summer through, and kept me from all misfortune and from
ferocious birds.  Indeed, my dear son, if you take refuge in
the churches and help to clear away spiders and buzzing flies,
and chirp unto God like the young ravens, and commend
yourself to the eternal creator, all will be well with you,
and that even if the whole world were full of wild malicious birds.
               He who to God commits his ways,
               in silence suffers, waits, and prays,
               preserves his faith and conscience pure,
               he is of God's protection sure.
There was once a poor widow who lived in a lonely cottage.  In
front of the cottage was a garden wherein stood two rose-trees,
one of which bore white and the other red roses.  She had two
children who were like the two rose-trees, and one was called
snow-white, and the other rose-red.  They were as good and happy,
as busy and cheerful as ever two children in the world were, only
snow-white was more quiet and gentle than rose-red.  Rose-red
liked better to run about in the meadows and fields seeking
flowers and catching butterflies, but snow-white sat at home
with her mother, and helped her with her house-work, or read to
her when there was nothing to do.
The two children were so fond of one another that they always
held each other by the hand when they went out together, and
when snow-white said, we will not leave each other, rose-red
answered, never so long as we live, and their mother would
add, what one has she must share with the other.
They often ran about the forest alone and gathered red berries,
and no beasts did them any harm, but came close to them
trustfully.  The little hare would eat a cabbage-leaf out of
their hands, the roe grazed by their side, the stag leapt
merrily by them, and the birds sat still upon the boughs, and
sang whatever they knew.
No mishap overtook them, if they had stayed too late in the
forest, and night came on, they laid themselves down near one
another upon the moss, and slept until morning came, and their
mother knew this and did not worry on their account.
Once when they had spent the night in the wood and the dawn
had roused them, they saw a beautiful child in a shining white
dress sitting near their bed.  He got up and looked quite kindly
at them, but said nothing and went away into the forest.  And
when they looked round they found that they had been sleeping
quite close to a precipice, and would certainly have fallen into
it in the darkness if they had gone only a few paces further.
And their mother told them that it must have been the angel who
watches over good children.
Snow-white and rose-red kept their mother's little cottage so
neat that it was a pleasure to look inside it.  In the summer
rose-red took care of the house, and every morning laid a wreath
of flowers by her mother's bed before she awoke, in which was
a rose from each tree.  In the winter snow-white lit the fire and
hung the kettle on the hob.  The kettle was of brass and shone
like gold, so brightly was it polished.  In the evening, when
the snowflakes fell, the mother said, go, snow-white, and bolt
the door, and then they sat round the hearth, and the mother
took her spectacles and read aloud out of a large book, and the
two girls listened as they sat and spun.  And close by them lay
a lamb upon the floor, and behind them upon a perch sat a white
dove with its head hidden beneath its wings.
One evening, as they were thus sitting comfortably together,
someone knocked at the door as if he wished to be let in.  The
mother said, quick, rose-red, open the door, it must be a traveler
who is seeking shelter.  Rose-red went and pushed back the bolt,
thinking that it was a poor man, but it was not.  It was a
bear that stretched his broad, black head within the door.
Rose-red screamed and sprang back, the lamb bleated, the dove
fluttered, and snow-white hid herself behind her mother's bed.
But the bear began to speak and said, do not be afraid, I will
do you no harm.  I am half-frozen, and only want to warm myself
a little beside you.
Poor bear, said the mother, lie down by the fire, only take
care that you do not burn your coat.  Then she cried, snow-white,
rose-red, come out, the bear will do you no harm, he means well.
So they both came out, and by-and-by the lamb and dove came
nearer, and were not afraid of him.  The bear said, here,
children, knock the snow out of my coat a little.  So they
brought the broom and swept the bear's hide clean, and he
stretched himself by the fire and growled contentedly and
comfortably.  It was not long before they grew quite at home,
and played tricks with their clumsy guest.  They tugged his
hair with their hands, put their feet upon his back and rolled
him about, or they took a hazel-switch and beat him, and when he
growled they laughed.  But the bear took it all in good part, only
when they were too rough he called out, leave me alive, children,
               snow-white, rose-red,
               will you beat your wooer dead.
When it was bed-time, and the others went to bed, the mother
said to the bear, you can lie there by the hearth, and then you
will be safe from the cold and the bad weather.  As soon as day
dawned the two children let him out, and he trotted across
the snow into the forest.
Henceforth the bear came every evening at the same time, laid
himself down by the hearth, and let the children amuse themselves
with him as much as they liked.  And they got so used to him that
the doors were never fastened until their black friend had arrived.
When spring had come and all outside was green, the bear said
one morning to snow-white, now I must go away, and cannot come
back for the whole summer.  Where are you going, then, dear bear,
asked snow-white.  I must go into the forest and guard my treasures
from the wicked dwarfs.  In the winter, when the earth is frozen
hard, they are obliged to stay below and cannot work their
way through, but now, when the sun has thawed and warmed the
earth, they break through it, and come out to pry and steal.  And
what once gets into their hands, and in their caves, does not
easily see daylight again.
Snow-white was quite sorry at his departure, and as she unbolted
the door for him, and the bear was hurrying out, he caught against
the bolt and a piece of his hairy coat was torn off, and it
seemed to snow-white as if she had seen gold shining through
it, but she was not sure about it.  The bear ran away quickly,
and was soon out of sight behind the trees.
A short time afterwards the mother sent her children into the
forest to get fire-wood.  There they found a big tree which lay
felled on the ground, and close by the trunk something was
jumping backwards and forwards in the grass, but they could
not make out what it was.  When they came nearer they saw a dwarf
with an old withered face and a snow-white beard a yard long.  The
end of the beard was caught in a crevice of the tree, and the
little fellow was jumping about like a dog tied to a rope, and did
not know what to do.
He glared at the girls with his fiery red eyes and cried, why do
you stand there.  Can you not come here and help me.  What are
you up to, little man, asked rose-red.  You stupid, prying
goose, answered the dwarf.  I was going to split the tree to get
a little wood for cooking.  The little bit of food that we people
get is immediately burnt up with heavy logs.  We do not swallow
so much as you coarse, greedy folk.  I had just driven the
wedge safely in, and everything was going as I wished, but the
cursed wedge was too smooth and suddenly sprang out, and the tree
closed so quickly that I could not pull out my beautiful white
beard, so now it is tight in and I cannot get away, and the silly,
sleek, milk-faced things laugh.  Ugh.  How odious you are.
The children tried very hard, but they could not pull the
beard out, it was caught too fast.  I will run and fetch someone,
said rose-red.  You senseless goose, snarled the dwarf.  Why
should you fetch someone.  You are already two too many for me.
Can you not think of something better.  Don't be impatient, said
snow-white, I will help you, and she pulled her scissors out of
her pocket, and cut off the end of the beard.
As soon as the dwarf felt himself free he laid hold of a bag which
lay amongst the roots of the tree, and which was full of gold,
and lifted it up, grumbling to himself, uncouth people, to cut
off a
piece of my fine beard.  Bad luck to you, and then he swung the
bag upon his back, and went off without even once looking at
the children.
Some time afterwards snow-white and rose-red went to catch a
dish of fish.  As they came near the brook they saw something
like a large grasshopper jumping towards the water, as if
it were going to leap in.  They ran to it and found it was the
dwarf.  Where are you going, said rose-red, you surely don't
want to go into the water.  I am not such a fool, cried the
dwarf.  Don't you see that the accursed fish wants to pull
me in.  The little man had been sitting there fishing, and
unluckily the wind had tangled up his beard with the fishing-line.
A moment later a big fish made a bite and the feeble
creature had not strength to pull it out.  The fish kept the
upper hand and pulled the dwarf towards him.  He held on to
all the reeds and rushes, but it was of little good, for he
was forced to follow the movements of the fish, and was in
urgent danger of being dragged into the water.
The girls came just in time.  They held him fast and tried to
free his beard from the line, but all in vain, beard and line
were entangled fast together.  There was nothing to do but to
bring out the scissors and cut the beard, whereby a small part
of it was lost.  When the dwarf saw that he screamed out,
is that civil, you toadstool, to disfigure a man's face.  Was
it not enough to clip off the end of my beard.  Now you have
cut off the best part of it.  I cannot let myself be seen by
my people.  I wish you had been made to run the soles off your
shoes.  Then he took out a sack of pearls which lay in the
rushes, and without another word he dragged it away and
disappeared behind a stone.
It happened that soon afterwards the mother sent the two children
to the town to buy needles and thread, and laces and ribbons.  The
road led them across a heath upon which huge pieces of rock lay
strewn about.  There they noticed a large bird hovering in the
air, flying slowly round and round above them.  It sank lower and
lower, and at last settled near a rock not far away.  Immediately
they heard a loud, piteous cry.  They ran up and saw with horror
that the
eagle had seized their old acquaintance the dwarf, and was going
to carry him off.
The children, full of pity, at once took tight hold of the little
man, and pulled against the eagle so long that at last he let
his booty go.  As soon as the dwarf had recovered from his
first fright he cried with his shrill voice, could you not have
done it more carefully.  You dragged at my brown coat so that it
is all torn and full of holes, you clumsy creatures.  Then he
took up a sack full of precious stones, and slipped away again
under the rock into his hole.  The girls, who by this time
were used to his ingratitude, went on their way and did their
business in the town.
As they crossed the heath again on their way home they surprised
the dwarf, who had emptied out his bag of precious stones in
a clean spot, and had not thought that anyone would come there
so late.  The evening sun shone upon the brilliant stones.
They glittered and sparkled with all colors so beautifully that
the children stood still and stared at them.  Why do you stand
gaping there, cried the dwarf, and his ashen-gray face became
copper-red with rage.  He was still cursing when a loud
growling was heard, and a black bear came trotting towards them
out of the forest.  The dwarf sprang up in a fright, but he
could not reach his cave, for the bear was already close.  Then
in the dread of his heart he cried, dear mr. Bear, spare me, I
will give you all my treasures, look, the beautiful jewels
lying there. Grant me my life.  What do you want with such a
slender little fellow as I.  You would not feel me between
your teeth.  Come, take these two wicked girls, they are tender
morsels for you, fat as young quails, for mercy's sake eat them.
The bear took no heed of his words, but gave the wicked creature
a single blow with his paw, and he did not move again.
The girls had run away, but the bear called to them, snow-white
and rose-red, do not be afraid.  Wait, I will come with you.
Then they recognised his voice and waited, and when he came up
to them suddenly his bearskin fell off, and he stood there,
a handsome man, clothed all in gold.  I am a king's son, he said,
and I was bewitched by that wicked dwarf, who had stolen my
treasures.
I have had to run about the forest as a savage bear until I was
freed by his death.  Now he has got his well-deserved punishment.
Snow-white was married to him, and rose-red to his brother,
and they divided between them the great treasure which the dwarf
had gathered together in his cave.  The old mother lived
peacefully and happily with her children for many years.  She took
the two rose-trees with her, and they stood before her window, and
every year bore the most beautiful roses, white and red.
Let no one ever say that a poor tailor cannot do great things
and win high honors.  All that is needed is that he should go to
the right smithy, and what is of most consequence, that he
should have good luck.  A civil, smart tailor's apprentice
once went out traveling, and came into a great forest, and,
as he did not know the way, he lost himself.  Night fell and
nothing was left for him to do in this painful solitude, but to
seek a bed.  He might certainly have found a good bed on the
soft moss, but the fear of wild beasts let him have no rest
there, and at last he made up his mind to spend the night in
a tree.  He sought out a high oak, climbed up to the top of it,
and thanked God that he had his goose with him, for otherwise
the wind which blew over the top of the tree would have carried
him away.
After he had spent some hours in the darkness, not without fear
and trembling, he saw at a very short distance the glimmer of a
light, and as he thought that a human habitation might be there,
where he would be better off than on the branches of a tree, he
got carefully down and went towards the light.  It guided him
to a small hut that was woven together of reeds and rushes.  He
knocked
boldly, the door opened, and by the light which came forth he saw
a little hoary old man who wore a coat made of bits of colored
stuff sewn together.  Who are you, and what do you want, asked
the man in a grumbling voice.  I am a poor tailor, he answered,
whom night has surprised here in the wilderness, and I earnestly
beg you to take me into your hut until morning.  Go your way,
replied the old man in a surly voice, I will have nothing to do
with tramps, seek for yourself a shelter elsewhere.  Having said
this, he was about to slip into his hut again, but the tailor
held him so tightly by the corner of his coat, and pleaded so
piteously, that the old man, who was not so ill-natured as he
wished to appear, was at last softened, and took him into the
hut with him where he gave him something to eat, and then offered
him a very good bed in a corner.
The weary tailor needed no rocking, but slept sweetly till morning,
but even then would not have thought of getting up, if he had
not been aroused by a great noise.  A violent sound of screaming
and roaring forced its way through the thin walls of the hut.
The tailor, full of unwonted courage, jumped up, put his clothes
on in haste, and hurried out.  Then close by the hut, he saw
a great black bull and a beautiful stag, which were just
preparing for a violent struggle.  They rushed at each other with
such extreme rage that the ground shook with their trampling,
and the air resounded with their cries.  For a long time it
was uncertain which of the two would gain the victory, at
length the stag thrust his horns into his adversary's body,
whereupon the bull fell to the earth with a terrific roar, and
was finished off by a few strokes from the stag.
The tailor, who had watched the fight with astonishment, was
still standing there motionless, when the stag in full career
bounded up to him, and before he could escape, caught him up
on his great horns.  He had not much time to collect his thoughts,
for it went in a swift race over stock and stone, mountain and
valley, wood and meadow.  He held with both hands to the ends
of the horns, and resigned himself to his fate.  It seemed
to him just as if he were flying away.  At length the stag
stopped in front of a wall of rock, and gently let the tailor
down.  The tailor, more dead than alive, required
some time to come to himself.  When he had in some degree
recovered, the stag, which had remained standing by him, pushed
its horns with such force against a door in the rock, that
it sprang open.  Flames of fire shot forth, after which followed
a great smoke, which hid the stag from his sight.  The tailor
did not know what to do, or whither to turn, in order to get
out of this desert and back to human beings again.  Whilst
he was standing thus undecided, a voice sounded out of the rock,
which cried to him, enter without fear, no evil shall befall you.
He hesitated, but driven by a mysterious force, he obeyed the
voice and went through the iron-door into a large spacious
hall, whose ceiling, walls and floor were made of shining polished
square stones, on each of which were carved signs which were
unknown to him.  He looked at everything full of admiration,
and was on the point of going out again, when he once more
heard the voice which said to him, step on the stone
which lies in the middle of the hall, and great good fortune
awaits you.
His courage had already grown so great that he obeyed the order.
The stone began to give way under his feet, and sank slowly down
into the depths.  When it was once more firm, and the tailor looked
round, he found himself in a hall which in size resembled the
former.  Here, however, there was more to look at and to admire.
Hollow places were cut in the walls, in which stood vases of
transparent glass and filled with colored spirit or with a
bluish vapor.  On the floor of the hall two great glass chests
stood opposite to each other, which at once excited his curiosity.
When he went to one of them he saw inside it a handsome structure
like a castle surrounded by farm-buildings, stables and barns,
and a quantity of other good things.  Everything was small, but
exceedingly carefully and delicately made, and seemed to be
carved out by a dexterous hand with the greatest precision.
He might not have turned away his eyes from the consideration
of this rarity for some time, had not the voice once more made
itself heard.  It ordered him to turn round and look at the
glass chest which was standing opposite.  How his admiration
increased when
he saw therein a maiden of the greatest beauty.  She lay as if
asleep, and was wrapped in her long fair hair as in a
precious mantle.  Her eyes were closely shut, but the brightness
of her complexion and a ribbon which her breathing moved to
and fro, left no doubt that she was alive.  The tailor was
looking at the beauty with beating heart, when she suddenly
opened her eyes, and started up at the sight of him with a shock
of joy.  Divine providence, cried she, my deliverance is
at hand.  Quick, quick, help me out of my prison.  If you
push back the bolt of this glass coffin, then I shall be free.
The tailor obeyed without delay, and she immediately raised up
the glass lid, came out and hastened into the corner of the hall,
where she covered herself with a large cloak.  Then she seated
herself on a
stone, ordered the young man to come to her, and after she had
imprinted a friendly kiss on his lips, she said, my long-desired
deliverer, kind heaven has guided you to me, and put an end
to my sorrows.  On the self-same day when they end, shall your
happiness begin.  You are the husband chosen for me by heaven, and
shall pass your life in unbroken joy, loved by me, and rich to
overflowing in every earthly possession.  Seat yourself, and
listen to the story of my life.
I am the daughter of a rich count.  My parents died when I was
still in my tender youth, and recommended me in their last will
to my elder brother, by whom I was brought up.  We loved each
other so tenderly, and were so alike in our way of thinking
and our inclinations, that we both embraced the resolution
never to marry, but to stay together to the end of our lives.
In our house there was no lack of company.  Neighbors and friends
visited us often, and we showed the greatest hospitality to
every one.  So it came to pass one evening that a stranger came
riding to our castle, and, under pretext of not being able to
get on to the next place, begged for shelter for the night.
We granted his request with ready courtesy, and he entertained us
in the most agreeable manner during supper by conversation
intermingled with stories.  My brother liked the stranger so
much that he begged him to spend a couple of days with us, to
which, after some hesitation, he consented.  We did not rise
from table until late in the night, the stranger was shown to
a room, and I hastened, as I was tired, to lay my limbs in
my soft bed.  Hardly had I fallen off to sleep, when the sound
of faint and delightful music awoke me.  As I could not
conceive from whence it came, I wanted to summon my waiting-maid
who slept in the next room, but to my astonishment I found that
speech was taken away from me by an unknown force.  I felt as if
a nightmare were weighing down my breast, and was unable to make
the very slightest sound.  In the meantime, by the light of
my night-lamp, I saw the stranger enter my room through two
doors which were fast bolted.  He came to me and said, that
by magic arts which were at his command, he had caused the
lovely music to sound in order to awaken me, and
that he now forced his way through all fastenings with the
intention of offering his hand and heart.  My dislike of his
magic arts was so great, however, that I refused to answer him.
He remained for a time standing without moving, apparently with
the idea of waiting for a favorable decision, but as I continued
to keep silence, he angrily declared he would revenge himself
and find means to punish my pride, and left the room.  I
passed the night in the greatest disquietude, and fell asleep
only towards morning.  When I awoke, I hurried to my brother, but
did not find him in his room, and the attendants told me that he
had ridden forth with the stranger to the chase at daybreak.

I at once suspected nothing good.  I dressed myself quickly,
ordered my palfrey to be saddled, and accompanied only by one
servant, rode full gallop to the forest.  The servant fell with
his horse, and could not follow me, for the horse had broken its
foot.  I pursued my way without halting, and in a few minutes
I saw the stranger coming towards me with a beautiful stag which
he led by a cord.  I asked him where he had left my brother, and
how he had come by this stag, out of whose great eyes I saw
tears flowing.  Instead of answering me, he began to laugh
loudly.  I fell into a great rage at this, pulled out a pistol
and discharged it at the monster, but the ball rebounded from
his breast and went into my horse's head.  I fell to the ground,
and the stranger muttered some words which deprived me of
consciousness.
When I came to my senses again I found myself in this underground
cave in a glass coffin.  The magician appeared once again, and
said he had changed my brother into a stag, my castle with all
that belonged to it, diminished in size by his arts, he had
shut up in the other glass chest, and my people, who were all
turned into smoke, he had confined in glass bottles.  He
told me that if I would now comply with his wish, it would be an
easy thing for him to put everything back in its former state, as
he had nothing to do but open the vessels, and everything would
return once more to its natural form.  I answered him as little
as I had done the first time.  He vanished and left me in my
prison, in which a deep sleep came on me.
Among the visions which passed before my eyes, the most
comforting was that in which a young man came and set me free,
and when I opened my eyes to-day I saw you, and beheld my
dream fulfilled.  Help me to accomplish the other things
which happened in those visions.  The first is that we lift the
glass chest in which my castle is enclosed, on to that broad stone.
As soon as the stone was laden, it began to rise up on high with
the maiden and the young man, and mounted through the opening
of the ceiling into the upper hall, from whence they then could
easily reach the open air.  Here the maiden opened the lid, and
it was marvellous to behold how the castle, the houses, and
the farm buildings which were enclosed, stretched themselves out
and grew to their natural size with the greatest rapidity.
After this, the maiden and the tailor returned to the cave beneath
the earth, and had the vessels which were filled with smoke
carried up by the stone.  The maiden had scarcely opened the
bottles when the blue smoke rushed out and changed itself into
living men, in whom she recognized her servants and her people.
Her joy was still more increased when her brother, who had
killed the magician in the form of the bull, came out of the
forest towards them in his human form, and on the self-same day
the maiden, in accordance with her promise, gave her hand at the
altar to the lucky tailor.
Harry was lazy, and although he had nothing else to do but
drive his goat daily to pasture, he nevertheless groaned
when he went home after his day's work was done.  It is indeed
a heavy burden, said he, and a wearisome employment to drive
a goat into the field this way year after year, till late into
the autumn.  If one could but lie down and sleep, but no, one
must have
one's eyes open lest the goat hurts the young trees, or squeezes
itself through the hedge into a garden, or runs away altogether.
How can one have any rest, or enjoy one's life.  He seated
himself, collected his thoughts, and considered how he could
set his shoulders free from this burden.  For a long time all
thinking was to no purpose, but suddenly it was as if scales
fell from his eyes.  I know what I will do, he cried, I will
marry fat trina who has also a goat, and can take mine out with
hers, and then I shall have no more need to trouble myself.
So harry got up, set his weary legs in motion, and went right
across the street, for it was no farther, to where the parents of
fat trina lived, and asked for their industrious and virtuous
daughter in marriage.  The parents did not reflect long.  Birds
of a feather, flock together, they thought, and consented.
So fat trina became harry's wife, and led out both the goats.
Harry had a good time of it, and had no work that he required to
rest from but his own idleness.  He went out with her only now
and then, and said, I merely do it that I may afterwards enjoy
rest more, otherwise one loses all feeling for it.
But fat trina was no less idle.  Dear harry, said she one day,
why should we make our lives so toilsome when there is no need
for it, and thus ruin the best days of our youth.  Would it not
be better for us to give the two goats which disturb us every
morning in our sweetest sleep with their bleating, to our
neighbor, and he will give us a beehive for them.  We will put
the beehive in a sunny place behind the house, and trouble
ourselves no more about it.  Bees do not require to be taken
care of, or driven into the field.  They fly out and find the way
home again for themselves, and collect honey without giving the
very least trouble.  You have spoken like a sensible woman,
replied harry.  We will carry out your proposal without delay,
and besides all that, honey tastes better and nourishes one
better than goat's milk, and it can be kept longer too.
The neighbor willingly gave a beehive for the two goats.  The
bees flew in and out from early morning till late evening
without ever tiring, and filled the hive with the most beautiful
honey, so
that in autumn harry was able to take a whole pitcherful out of
it.
They placed the jug on a board which was fixed to the wall of
their bed-room, and as they were afraid that it might be stolen,
or that the mice might find it, trina brought in a stout
hazel-stick and put it beside her bed, so that without
unnecessary motion she might reach it with her hand, and drive
away the uninvited guests.
Lazy harry did not like to leave his bed before noon.  He who
rises early, said he, wastes his substance.  One morning when
he was still lying amongst the feathers in broad daylight,
resting after his long sleep, he said to his wife, women are
fond of sweet things, and you are always tasting the honey in
private.  It will be better for us to exchange it for a goose
with a young gosling, before you eat up the whole of it.  But,
answered trina, not before we have a child to take care of them.
Am I to worry myself with the little geese, and spend all my
strength on them to no purpose.  Do you think, said harry, that
the youngster will look after geese.  Now-a-days children no
longer obey, they do according to their own fancy, because they
consider themselves cleverer than their parents, just like
that lad who was sent to seek the cow and chased three blackbirds.
Oh, replied trina, this one shall fare badly if he does not do
what I say.  I will take a stick and belabor his skin with more
blows than I can count.  Look, harry, cried she in her zeal, and
seized the stick with which she used to drive the mice away, look,
this is the way I will fall on him.  She reached her arm out
to strike, but unhappily hit the honey-pitcher above the bed.
The pitcher struck against the wall and fell down in shards,
and the fine honey streamed out on the ground.  There lie the
goose and the young gosling, said
harry, and want no looking after.  But it is lucky that the
pitcher did not fall on my head.  We have all reason to be
satisfied with our lot.  And then as he saw that there was still
some honey in one of the shards he stretched out his hand for
it, and said quite gaily, the remains, my wife, we will still
eat with relish, and we will rest a little after the fright we
have had.  What does it matter if we do get up a little later.
The day is always long enough.  Yes, answered trina, we shall
always get to the end of it at the proper time.  You know, the
snail was once asked to a wedding and set out to go, but arrived
at the christening.  In front of the house it fell over the
fence, and said, speed does no good.
There was once upon a time a king, but where he reigned and what
he was called, I do not know.  He had no son, but an only daughter
who had always been ill, and no doctor had been able to cure her.
Then it was foretold to the king that his daughter would find her
health by eating an apple.  So he ordered it to be proclaimed
throughout the whole of his kingdom, that whosoever brought his
daughter an apple with which she could find her health, should
have her to wife, and be king.  This became known to a peasant
who had three sons, and he said to the eldest, go out into the
garden and take a basketful of those beautiful apples with
the red cheeks and carry them to the court, perhaps the king's
daughter will be able to find her health with them, and then you
will marry her and be king.  The lad did so, and set out.  When
he had gone a short way he met a hoary little man who asked him
what he had there in the basket, to which replied uele for so was
he named, frogs, legs.  At this the little man said, well, so
shall it be, and remain, and went away.  At length uele arrived at
the palace, and made it known that he had brought apples which
would cure the king's daughter if she ate them.  This delighted the
king hugely, and he caused uele to be brought before him, but,
alas.  When he opened the basket, instead of having apples in it he
had frogs, legs which were still kicking about.  On this the king
grew angry, and had him driven out of the house.  When he got home
he told his father how it had fared with him.  Then the father
sent the next son, who was called same, but all went with him just
as it had gone with uele.  He also met the hoary little man,
who asked what he had there in the basket.  Same said, hogs,
bristles, and the hoary man said, well, so shall it be, and remain.
When same got to the king's palace and said he brought apples with
which the king's daughter might find her health, they did not
want to let him go in, and said that one fellow had already been
there, and had treated them as if they were fools.  Same, however,
maintained that he certainly had the apples, and that they ought
to let him go in.  At length they believed him, and led him to the
king.  But when he uncovered the basket, he had but hogs, bristles.
This enraged the king most terribly, so he caused same to be whipped
out of the house.  When he got home he related all that had befallen
him, whereupon the youngest boy, whose name was Hans, but who was
always called stupid Hans, came and asked his father if he might
go with some apples.  Oh, said the father, you would be just the
right fellow for such a thing.  If the clever one can't manage it,
what can you do.  The boy, however, insisted and said, indeed,
father, I wish to go.  Just get away, you stupid fellow, you must
wait till you are wiser, said the father to that, and turned his
back.  Hans, however, pulled at the back of his smock and
said, indeed, father, I wish to go.  Well, then, so far as I am
concerned you may go, but you will soon come home again, replied
the old man in a spiteful voice.  The boy was tremendously delighted
and jumped for joy.  Well, act like a fool.  You grow more stupid
every day, said the father again.  But Hans was not discouraged, and
did not let it spoil his pleasure, but as it was then night, he
thought he might as well wait until the morrow, for he could
not get to court that day.  All night long he could not sleep in his
bed, and if he did doze for a moment, he dreamt of beautiful
maidens, of palaces, of gold, and of silver, and all kinds of things
of that sort.  Early in the morning, he went forth on his way, and
directly afterwards the little shabby-looking man in his icy
clothes, came to him and asked what he was carrying in the basket.
Hans gave him the answer that he was carrying apples with which the
king's daughter was to find her health.  Then, said the little man,
so shall they be, and remain.  But at the court they would none of
them let Hans go in, for they said two had already been there who
had told them that they were bringing apples, and one of them had
frogs, legs, and the other hogs, bristles.  Hans, however,
resolutely maintained that he most certainly had no frogs, legs,
but some of the most beautiful apples in the whole kingdom.  As he
spoke so pleasantly, the door-keeper thought he could not be
telling a lie, and asked him to go in, and he was right, for when
Hans uncovered his basket in the king's presence, golden-yellow
apples came tumbling out.  The king was delighted, and caused some
of them to be
taken to his daughter, and then waited in anxious expectation until
news should be brought to him of the effect they had.  But
before much time had passed by, news was brought to him.  And who
do you think it was who came.  It was the daughter herself.  As
soon as she had eaten of those apples, she was cured, and sprang
out of her bed.  The joy the king felt cannot be described.  But
now he did not want to give his daughter in marriage to Hans, and
said he must first make him a boat which would go quicker on dry
land than on water.  Hans agreed to the condition, and went home,
and related how it had fared with him.  Then the father sent
uele into
the forest to make a boat of that kind.  He worked diligently,
and whistled all the time.  At mid-day, when the sun was at
its highest, came the little icy man and asked what he was making.
Uele gave him for answer, wooden bowls for the kitchen.  The
icy man said, so it shall be, and remain.  By evening uele
thought he had now made the boat, but when he wanted to get
into it, he had nothing but wooden bowls.  The next day same
went into the forest, but everything went with him just as it
had done with uele.  On the third day stupid Hans went.  He worked
away most industriously, so that the whole forest resounded
with the heavy blows, and all the while he sang and whistled
right merrily.  At mid-day, when it was the hottest, the little
man came again, and asked what he was making.  A boat which will
go quicker on dry land than on water, replied Hans, and when
I have finished it, I am to have the king's daughter for my wife.
Well, said the little man, such an one shall it be, and remain.
In the evening, when the sun had turned into gold, Hans finished
his boat, and all that was wanted for it.  He got into it and
rowed to the palace.  The boat went as swiftly as the wind.  The
king saw it from afar, but would not give his daughter to Hans
yet, and said he must first take a hundred hares out to pasture
from early morning until late evening, and if one of them got
away, he should not have his daughter.  Hans was contented
with this, and the next day went with his flock to the pasture,
and took great care that none of them ran away.
Before many hours had passed came a servant from the palace, and
told Hans that he must give her a hare instantly, for some
visitors had come unexpectedly.  Hans, however, was very well
aware what that meant, and said he would not give her one.  The
king might set some hare soup before his guest next day.  The
maid, however, would not accept his refusal, and at last she
began to argue with him.  Then Hans said that if the king's
daughter came herself, he would give her a fare.  The maid told
this in the palace, and the daughter did go herself.  In the
meantime the little man came again to Hans, and asked him what he
was doing there.  He said he had to watch over a hundred hares
and see that none of them ran away,
and then he might marry the king's daughter and be king.  Good,
said the little man, there is a whistle for you, and if one of
them runs away, just whistle with it, and then it will come
back again.  When the king's daughter came, Hans gave her a
hare into her apron, but when she had gone about a hundred steps
with it, he whistled, and the hare jumped out of the apron,
and before she could turn round was back to the flock again.
When the evening came the hare-herd whistled once more, and
looked to see if all were there, and then drove them to the
palace.  The king wondered how Hans had been able to take a
hundred hares to graze without losing any of them, but he still
would not give him his daughter yet, and said he must now
bring him a feather from the griffin's tail.  Hans set out at
once, and walked straight forwards.  In the evening he came
to a castle, and there he asked for a night's lodging, for at
that time there were no inns.  The lord of the castle promised
him that with much pleasure, and asked where he was going.  Hans
answered, to the griffin.  Oh, to the griffin.  They tell me
he knows everything, and I have lost the key of an iron money-chest.
So you might be so good as to ask him where it is.  Yes,
indeed, said Hans, I will do that.  Early the next morning he
went onwards, and on his way arrived at another castle in which
he again stayed the night.  When the people who lived there
learnt that he was going to the griffin, they said they had
in the house a daughter who was ill, and that they had already
tried every means to cure her, but none of them had done her
any good, and he might be so kind as to ask the griffin what
would make their daughter healthy again.  Hans said he would
willingly do that, and went onwards.  Then he came to a lake,
and instead of a ferry-boat, a tall, tall man was there who
had to carry everybody across.  The man asked Hans whither he was
journeying.  To the griffin, said Hans.  Then when you get to
him, said the man, just ask him why I am forced to carry
everybody over the lake.  Yes, indeed, most certainly I'll do
that, said Hans.  Then the man took him up on his shoulders, and
carried him across.  At length Hans arrived at the griffin's
house, but the wife only was at home, and not the griffin
himself.  Then the woman asked him what he wanted.  Thereupon he
told her everything - that he had to get a feather out of the
griffin's tail, and that there was a castle where they had lost
the key of their money-chest, and he was to ask the griffin where
it was - that in another castle the daughter was ill, and
he was to learn what would cure her - and then not far from thence
there was a lake and a man beside it, who was forced to carry
people across it, and he was very anxious to learn why the man
was obliged to do it.  Then said the woman, look here, my good
friend, no christian can speak to the griffin.  He devours them
all, but if you like you can lie down under his bed, and in the
night, when he is quite fast asleep, you can reach out and pull
a feather out of his tail, and as for those things which you
are to learn, I will ask about them myself.  Hans was quite
satisfied with
this, and got under the bed.  In the evening, the griffin came
home, and as soon as he entered the room, said, wife, I smell
a christian.  Yes, said the woman, one was here to-day, but he
went away again.  And on that the griffin said no more.
In the middle of the night when the griffin was snoring loudly,
Hans reached out and plucked a feather from his tail.  The
griffin woke up instantly, and said, wife, I smell a christian,
and it seems to me that somebody was pulling at my tail.  His
wife said, you have certainly been dreaming, and I told you
before that a christian was here to-day, but that he went away
again.  He told me all kinds of things - that in one castle they
had lost the key of their money-chest, and could find it nowhere.
Oh.  The fools, said the griffin.  The key lies in the wood-house
under a log of wood behind the door.  And then he said that in
another castle the daughter was ill, and they knew no remedy
that would cure her.  Oh.  The fools, said the griffin.  Under
the cellar-steps a toad has made its nest of her hair, and if
she got her hair back she would be well.  And then he also
said that there was a place where there was a lake and a man
beside it who was forced to carry everybody across.  Oh, the
fool, said the griffin.  If he only put one man down in the
middle, he would never have to carry another across.  Early the
next morning the griffin got up and went out.  Then Hans
came forth from under the bed, and he had a beautiful feather,
and had heard what the griffin had said about the key, and
the daughter, and the man.  The griffin's wife repeated it all
once more to him that he might not forget it, and then he went
home again.  First he came to the man by the lake, who asked
him what the griffin had said, but Hans replied that he must
first carry him across, and then he would tell him.  So the man
carried him across, and when he was over Hans told him that all
he had to do was to set one person down in the middle of the
lake, and then he would never have to carry over any more.  The
man was hugely delighted, and told Hans that out of gratitude he
would take him once more across, and back again.  But Hans said
no, he would save him the trouble, he was quite satisfied
already, and pursued his way.  Then he came to the
castle where the daughter was ill.  He took her on his shoulders,
for she could not walk, and carried her down the cellar-steps and
pulled out the toad's nest from beneath the lowest step and gave
it into her hand, and she sprang off his shoulder and up the
steps before him, and was quite cured.  Then were the father and
mother beyond measure rejoiced, and they gave Hans gifts of gold
and of silver, and whatsoever else he wished for, that they
gave him.  And when he got to the other castle he went at once
into the wood-house, and found the key under the log of wood
behind the door, and took it to the lord of the castle.  He
was not a little pleased, and gave Hans as a reward much of the
gold that was in the chest, and all kinds of things besides,
such as cows, and sheep, and goats.  When Hans arrived before
the king, with all these things - with the money, and the gold,
and the silver and the cows, sheep and goats, the king asked
him how he had come by them.  Then Hans told him that the
griffin gave every one whatsoever he wanted.  So the king thought
he himself could make use of such things, and set out on his way
to the griffin, but when he got to the lake, it happened that
he was the very first who arrived there after Hans, and the man
put him down in the middle of it and went away, and the king
was drowned.  Hans, however, married the daughter, and became
king.
There were once a man and a woman who had an only child, and
lived quite alone in a solitary valley.  It came to pass that the
mother once went into the wood to gather branches of fir, and
took with her little Hans, who was just two years old.  As it
was spring-time, and the child took pleasure in the many-colored
flowers, she went still further onwards with him into the forest.
Suddenly two robbers sprang out of the thicket, seized the mother
and child, and carried them far away into the black forest, where
no one ever came from one year's end to another.  The poor woman
urgently begged the robbers to set her and her child free, but
their hearts were made of stone, they would not listen to her
prayers and entreaties, and drove her on farther by force.  After
they had worked their way through bushes and briars for about
two miles, they came to a rock where there was a door, at which
the robbers knocked and it opened at once.  They had to go through
a long dark passage, which burnt on the hearth.  On the wall hung
swords, sabres, and other deadly weapons which gleamed in the
light, and in the midst stood a black table at which four other
robbers were sitting gambling, and the captain sat at the head of
it.  As soon as he saw the woman he came and spoke to her, and
told her to be at ease and have no fear, they would do nothing to
hurt her, but she must look after the housekeeping, and if she
kept everything in order, she should not fare ill with them.
Thereupon they gave her something to eat, and showed her a bed
where she might sleep with her child.
The woman stayed many years with the robbers, and Hans grew
tall and strong.  His mother told him stories, and taught him
to read an old book of tales about knights which she found in
the cave.  When Hans was nine years old, he made himself a strong
club out of a branch of fir, hid it behind the bed, and then
went to his mother and said, dear mother, pray tell me who is
my father.  I must and will know.  His mother was silent and
would not tell him, that he might not become home-sick.  Moreover
she knew that the godless robbers would not let him go away, but
it almost broke her heart that Hans should not go to his father.
In the night, when the robbers came home from their robbing
expedition, Hans brought out his club, stood before the captain,
and said, I now wish to know who my father is, and if you do not
tell me at once I will strike you down.  Then the captain laughed,
and gave Hans such a box on the ear that he rolled under the table.
Hans got up again, held his tongue, and thought, I will wait
another year and then try again, perhaps I shall do better then.
When the year was over, he brought out his club again, rubbed the
dust off it, looked at it well, and said,
it is a stout strong club.  At night the robbers came home,
drank one jug of wine after another, and their heads began to be
heavy.  Then Hans brought out his club, placed himself before
the captain, and asked him who his father was.  But the captain
again gave him such a vigorous box on the ear that Hans rolled
under the table.  However, it was not long before he was up again,
and so beat the captain and the robbers with his club, that
they could no longer move either their arms or their legs.
His mother stood in a corner full of admiration for his bravery
and strength.  When Hans had done his work, he went to his mother,
and said, now I have shown myself to be in earnest, but now I
must also know who my father is.  Dear Hans, answered the
mother, come, we will go and seek him until we find him.  She
took from the captain the key to the entrance-door, and Hans
fetched a great meal-sack and packed into it gold and silver, and
whatsoever else he could find that was beautiful, until it was
full, and then he took it on his back.  They left the cave, but
how Hans did open his eyes when he came out of the darkness
into daylight, and saw the green forest, and the flowers, and
the birds, and the morning sun in the sky.  He stood there and
wondered at everything just as if he were not quite right in the
head.  His mother looked for the way home, and when they had
walked for a couple of hours, they got safely into their lonely
valley and to their little house.  The father was sitting in the
doorway.  He wept for joy when he recognized his wife and heard
that Hans was his son, for he had long regarded them both as
dead.  But Hans, although he was not twelve years old, was a
head taller than his father.  They went into the little room
together, but Hans had scarcely put his sack on the bench by
the stove, than the whole house began to crack - the bench broke
down and then the floor, and the heavy sack fell through into
the cellar.  God save us, cried the father, what's that.  Now
you have broken our little house to pieces.  Don't let that turn
your hair grey, dear father, answered Hans.  There, in that sack,
is more than is wanting for a new house.  The father and Hans
at once began to build a new house, to buy cattle and land, and
to keep a farm.  Hans ploughed the fields, and
when he followed the plough and pushed it into the ground, the
bullocks had scarcely any need to draw.
The next spring, Hans said, keep all the money and have made for
me a walking-stick that weighs a hundred-weight, that I may
go a-traveling.  When the stick was ready, he left his father's
house, went forth, and came to a deep, dark forest.  There he
heard something crunching and cracking, looked round, and saw
a fir-tree which was wound round like a rope from the bottom to
the top, and when he looked upwards he saw a great fellow who
had laid hold of the tree and was twisting it like a willow-wand.
Hullo, cried Hans, what are you doing up there.  The fellow
replied, I got some faggots together yesterday and am twisting
a rope for them.  That is what I like, thought Hans, he has some
strength, and he called to him, leave that alone, and come with
me.  The fellow came down, and he was taller by a whole head than
Hans, and Hans was not little.  Your name is now fir-twister,
said Hans to him.  Thereupon they went further and heard something
knocking and hammering with such force that the ground shook
at every stroke.  Shortly afterwards they came to a mighty rock,
before which a giant was standing and striking great pieces of
it away with his fist.  When Hans asked what he was doing, he
answered, at night, when I want to sleep, bears, wolves, and
other vermin of that kind come, which sniff and snuffle about
me and won't let me rest, so I want to build myself a house and
lay myself inside it, so that I may have some peace.  Oh indeed,
thought Hans, I can make use of this one also, and said to him,
leave your house-building alone, and go with me.  You shall be
called rock-splitter.  The man consented, and they all three
roamed through the forest, and wherever they went the wild beasts
were terrified, and ran away from them.  In the evening they
came to an old deserted castle, went up into it, and
laid themselves down in the hall to sleep.  The next morning Hans
went into the garden.  It had run quite wild, and was full of
thorns and brambles.  And as he was thus walking round about,
a wild boar rushed at him, he, however, gave it such a blow
with his club that it fell directly.  He took it on his shoulders
and carried it
in, and they put it on a spit, roasted it, and enjoyed themselves.
Then they arranged that each day, in turn, two should go out
hunting, and one should stay at home, and cook nine pounds
of meat for each of them.  Fir-twister stayed at home the first,
and Hans and rock-splitter went out hunting.  When fir-twister
was busy cooking, a little shrivelled-up old mannikin came to him
in the castle, and asked for some meat.  Be off, you sneaking
imp, he answered, you need no meat.  But how astonished fir-twister
was when the little insignificant dwarf sprang up at him, and
belabored him so with his fists that he could not defend himself,
but fell on the ground and gasped for breath.  The dwarf did
not go away until he had thoroughly vented his anger on him.
When the two others came home from hunting, fir-twister said
nothing to them of the old mannikin and of the blows which he
himself had received, and thought, when they stay at home, they
may just try their  chance with the little scrubbing-brush, and
the mere thought of that gave him pleasure already.
The next day rock-splitter stayed at home, and he fared just
as fir-twister had done, being very ill-treated by the dwarf
because he was not willing to give him any meat.  When the others
came home in the evening, fir-twister saw clearly what he had
suffered, but both kept silence, and thought, Hans also
must taste some of that soup.
Hans, who had to stay at home the next day, did his work in
the kitchen as it had to be done, and as he was standing
skimming the pan, the dwarf came and without more ado
demanded a piece of meat.  Then Hans thought, he is a poor
wretch, I will give him some of my share, that the others may
not run short, and handed him a bit.  When the dwarf had
devoured it, he again asked for some meat, and good-natured
Hans gave it to him, and told him it was a handsome piece,
and that he was to be content with it.  But the dwarf begged
again for the third time.  You are shameless, said Hans, and gave
him none.  Then the malicious dwarf wanted to spring on him and
treat him as he had treated fir-twister and rock-splitter, but
he had chosen the wrong man.  Hans, without
exerting himself much, gave him a couple of blows which made
him jump down the castle steps.  Hans was about to run after him,
but fell right over, flat on his face.  When he rose up again,
the dwarf had got the start of him.  Hans hurried after him as far
as the forest, and saw him slip into a hole in the rock.  Hans now
went home, but he had marked the spot.  When the two others
came back, they were surprised that Hans was so well.  He told
them what had happened, and then they no longer concealed how
it had fared with them.  Hans laughed and said, it served you
quite right.  Why were you so mean with your meat.  It is a
disgrace that you who are so big should have let yourselves be
beaten by the dwarf.  Thereupon they took a basket and a rope,
and all three went to the hole in the rock into which the
dwarf had slipped, and let Hans and his club
down in the basket.  When Hans had reached the bottom, he found
a door, and when he opened it a maiden was sitting there
who was lovely as any picture, nay, so beautiful that no words
can express it, and by her side sat the dwarf and grinned at
Hans like a sea-cat.  She, however, was bound with chains, and
looked so mournfully at him that Hans felt great pity for her,
and thought to himself, you must deliver her out of the power of
the wicked dwarf, and gave him such a blow with his club that he
fell down dead.  Immediately the chains fell from
the maiden, and Hans was enraptured with her beauty.  She told
him she was a king's daughter whom a savage count had stolen
away from her home, and imprisoned there among the rocks,
because she would have nothing to say to him.  The count, however,
had set the dwarf as a watchman, and he had made her suffer
misery and vexation enough.  And now Hans placed the maiden in the
basket and had her drawn up.  The basket came down again, but
Hans did not trust his two companions, and thought, they have
already shown themselves to be false, and told me nothing about
the dwarf.  Who knows what design they may have against me.  So
he put his club in the basket, and it was lucky he did, for when
the basket was half-way up, they let it fall again, and if Hans
had really been sitting in it he would have been killed.  But
now he did not know how he was to work his way out of the depths,
and when he turned it over and over in his mind he found no
counsel.  It is indeed sad, said he to himself, that I have to
waste away down here, and as he was thus walking backwards and
forwards, he once more came to the little chamber where the maiden
had been sitting, and saw that the dwarf had a ring on his finger
which shone and sparkled.  Then he drew it off and put it on, and
when he turned it round on his finger, he suddenly heard something
rustle over his head.  He looked up and saw spirits of the air
hovering above, who told him he was their master, and asked
what his desire might be.  Hans was at first struck dumb, but
afterwards he said that they were to carry him up again.  They
obeyed instantly, and it was just as if he had flown up himself.
But when he had arrived there, he found no one in sight.
Fir-twister and rock-splitter
had hurried away, and had taken the beautiful maiden with them.
But Hans turned the ring, and the spirits of the air came and
told him that the two were on the sea.  Hans ran and ran without
stopping, until he came to the sea-shore, and there far, far out
on the water, he perceived a little boat in which his faithless
comrades were sitting, and in fierce anger he leapt, without
thinking what he was doing, club in hand into the water, and
began to swim, but the club, which weighed a hundredweight,
dragged him deep down until he was all but drowned.  Then
in the very nick of time he turned his ring, and immediately
the spirits of the air came and bore him as swift as lightning into
the boat.  He swung his club and gave his wicked comrades the
reward they merited and threw them into the water, and then he
sailed with the beautiful maiden, who had been in the greatest
alarm, and whom he delivered for the second time, home to her
father and mother, and married her, and all rejoiced exceedingly.
A poor wood-cutter lived with his wife and three daughters in
a little hut on the edge of a lonely forest.  One morning as he
was about to go to his work, he said to his wife, let our
eldest daughter bring me my dinner into the forest, or I shall
never get my work done, and in order that she may not miss
her way, he added, I will take a bag of millet with me and strew
the seeds on the path.  When, therefore, the sun was just above
the centre of the forest, the girl set out on her way with a
bowl of soup, but the field-sparrows, and wood-sparrows,
larks and finches, blackbirds and siskins had picked up the
millet long before, and the girl could not find the track.
Trusting to chance, she went on and on, until the sun sank and
night began to fall.  The trees rustled in the darkness, the
owls hooted, and she began to be afraid.  Then in the distance she
perceived a light which glimmered between the trees.  There
ought to be some people living there, who can take me in for the
night,
thought she, and went up to the light.  It was not long before
she came to a house the windows of which were all lighted up.  She
knocked, and a rough voice from inside cried, come in.  The
girl stepped into the dark entrance, and knocked at the door of
the room.  Just come in, cried the voice, and when she opened the
door, an old gray-haired man was sitting at the table, supporting
his face with both hands, and his white beard fell down over
the table almost as far as the ground.  By the stove lay three
animals, a hen, a cock, and a brindled cow.  The girl told her
story to the old man, and begged for shelter for the night.  The
man said,
               my pretty hen,
               my pretty cock,
               my pretty brindled cow,
               what are you saying now.
Duks, answered the animals, and that must have meant, we are
willing, for the old man said, here you shall have shelter
and food, go to the fire, and cook us our supper.  The girl
found in the kitchen abundance of everything, and cooked a
good supper, but had no thought of the animals.  She carried
the full bowl to the table, seated herself by the gray-haired man,
ate and satisfied her hunger.  When she had had enough, she said,
but now I am tired, where is there a bed in which I can lie down,
and sleep.  The animals replied,
               thou hast eaten with him,
               thou hast drunk with him,
               thou hast had no thought for us,
               so find out for thyself where thou canst pass the
               night.
Then said the old man, just go upstairs, and you will find a
room with two beds, shake them up, and put white linen on them,
and then I, too, will come and lie down to sleep.  The girl
went up, and when she had shaken the beds and put clean sheets
on, she lay down in one of them without waiting any longer for
the old man.  After some time the gray-haired man came, held his
candle over the girl and shook his head.  When he saw that she
had fallen into a sound sleep, he opened a trap-door, and let her
down into the cellar.
Late at night, the wood-cutter came home, and reproached his
wife for leaving him to hunger all day.  It is not my fault,
she replied, the girl went out with your dinner, and must have
lost herself, but surely she will come back to-morrow.  The
wood-cutter, however, arose before dawn to go into the forest, and
requested that the second daughter should take him his dinner
that day.  I will take a bag with lentils, said he, the seeds
are larger than millet, the girl will see them better, and
can't lose her way.  At dinner-time, therefore, the girl took
out the food, but the lentils had disappeared.  The birds of the
forest had picked them up as they had done the day before,
and had left none.  The girl wandered about in the forest
until night, and then she too reached the house of the old man,
was told to go in, and begged for food and a bed.  The man with
the white beard again asked the animals,
               my pretty hen,
               my pretty cock,
               my pretty brindled cow,
               what are you saying now.
The animals again replied 'duks, and everything happened just
as it had happened the day before.  The girl cooked a good meal,
ate and drank with the old man, and did not concern herself about
the animals, and when she inquired about her bed they answered,
               thou hast eaten with him,
               thou hast drunk with him,
               thou hast had no thought for us,
               so find out for thyself where thou canst pass
               the night.
When she was asleep the old man came, looked at her, shook his
head, and let her down into the cellar.
On the third morning the wood-cutter said to his wife, send our
youngest child out with my dinner to-day, she has always been good
and obedient, and will stay in the right path, and not rove about
like her sisters, the wild bumble-bees.  The mother did not
want to do it, and said, am I to lose my dearest child, as well.
Have no fear, he replied, the girl will not go astray.  She is
too prudent and sensible.  Besides I will take some peas with me,
strew them about.  They are still larger than lentils, and will
show her the way.  But when the girl went out with her basket on
her arm, the wood-pigeons had already got all the peas in their
crops, and she did not know which way she was to turn.  She was
full of sorrow and never ceased to think how hungry her father
would be, and how her good mother would grieve, if she did
not go home.  At length when it grew dark, she saw the light and
came to the house in the forest.  She begged quite prettily to
be allowed to spend the night there, and the man with the white
beard again asked his animals,
               my pretty hen,
               my pretty cock,
               my pretty brindled cow,
               what are you saying now.
Duks, said they.  Then the girl went to the stove where the
animals were lying, and petted the cock and hen, and stroked
their smooth feathers with her hand, and caressed the brindled
cow between her horns, and when, in obedience to the old man's
orders, she had made ready some good soup, and the bowl was
placed upon the table, she said, am I to eat as much as I want,
and the good animals to have nothing.  Outside is food in plenty,
I will look after them first.  So she went and brought some
barley and stewed it for the cock and hen, and a whole armful
of sweet-smelling hay for the cow.  I hope you will like it,
dear animals, said she, and you shall have a refreshing draught
in case you are thirsty.  Then she fetched a bucketful of water,
and the cock and hen jumped on to the edge of it and dipped
their beaks in, and then held up their heads as the birds do when
they drink, and the brindled cow also took a hearty draught.  When
the animals were fed, the girl seated herself at the table by
the old man, and ate what he had left.  It was not long before
the cock and the hen began to thrust their heads beneath
their wings, and the eyes of the cow likewise began to blink.
Then said the girl, ought we not to go to bed.
               My pretty hen,
               my pretty cock,
               my pretty brindled cow,
               what are you saying now.
The animals answered, duks,
               thou hast eaten with us,
               thou hast drunk with us,
               thou hast had kind thought for all of us,
               we wish thee good-night.
Then the maiden went upstairs, shook the feather-beds, and laid
clean sheets on them, and when she had done it the old man came
and lay down in one of the beds, and his white beard reached down
to his feet.  The girl lay down on the other, said her prayers,
and fell asleep.

She slept quietly till midnight, and then there was such a noise
in the house that she awoke.  There was a sound of cracking and
splitting in every corner, and the doors sprang open, and beat
against the walls.  The beams groaned as if they were being torn
out of their joints, it seemed as if the staircase were falling
down, and at length there was a crash as if the entire roof had
fallen in.  When, however, all grew quiet once more, and the girl
was not hurt, she stayed quietly lying where she was, and fell
asleep again.  But when she woke up in the morning with the
brilliancy of the sunshine, what did her eyes behold.  She was
lying in a vast hall, and everything around her shone with royal
splendor.  On the walls, golden flowers grew up on a ground of
green silk, the bed was of ivory, and the canopy of red velvet,
and on a chair close by, was a pair of slippers embroidered
with pearls.  The girl believed that she was in a dream, but
three richly clad attendants came in, and asked what orders she
would like to give.  If you will go, she replied, I will get up
at once and make ready some soup for the old man, and then I
will feed the pretty hen, and the pretty cock, and the pretty
brindled cow.  She thought the old man was up already, and looked
round at his bed.  He, however, was not lying in it, but a
stranger.

And while she was looking at him, and becoming aware that he was
young and handsome, he awoke, sat up in bed, and said, I am
a king's son, and was bewitched by a wicked witch, and made to
live in this forest, as an old gray-haired man.  No one was
allowed to be with me but my three attendants in the form
of a cock, a hen, and a brindled cow.  The spell was not to be
broken until a girl came to us whose heart was so good that she
showed herself full of love, not only towards mankind, but towards
animals - and that you have done, and by you at midnight we were
set free, and the old hut in the forest was changed back again
into my royal palace.  And when they had arisen, the king's son
ordered the three attendants to set out and fetch the father and
mother of the girl to the marriage feast.  But where are my two
sisters, inquired the maiden.  I have locked them in the cellar,
and to-morrow they shall be led into the forest, and shall live
as servants to a charcoal-burner, until they have grown kinder,
and do not leave poor animals to suffer hunger.
There was once upon a time a very old woman, who lived with her
flock of geese in a remote clearing in the mountains, and there
had a little house.  The clearing was surrounded by a large forest,
and every morning the old woman took her crutch and hobbled
into it.  There, however, she was quite active, more so than
any one would have thought, considering her age, and collected
grass for her geese, picked all the wild fruit she could
reach, and carried everything home on her back.  Anyone would have
thought that the heavy load would have weighed her to the ground,
but she always brought it safely home.  If anyone met her, she
greeted him quite courteously.  Good day, dear countryman, it
is a fine day.  Ah, you wonder that I should drag grass about, but
everyone must take his burden on his back.  Nevertheless, people
did not like to meet her if they could help it, and took by
preference a round-about way, and when a father with his boys
passed her, he whispered to them, beware of the old woman.  She
has claws beneath her gloves.  She is a witch.
One morning, a handsome young man was going through the forest.
The sun shone bright, the birds sang, a cool breeze crept
through the leaves, and he was full of joy and gladness.  He
had as yet met no one, when he suddenly perceived the old witch
kneeling on the ground cutting grass with a sickle.  She had
already thrust a whole load into her bundle, and near it stood
two baskets, which were filled with wild apples and pears.  But,
good little mother, said he, how can you carry all that away.  I
must carry it, dear sir, answered she, rich folk's children
have no need to do such things, but with the peasant folk the
saying goes, don't look behind you, you will only see how crooked
your back is.
Will you help me, she said, as he remained standing by her.
You have still a straight back and young legs, it would be a
trifle to you.  Besides, my house is not so very far from here,
it stands there on the heath behind the hill.  How soon you
would bound up thither.  The young man took compassion on the
old woman.  My father is certainly no peasant, replied he, but
a rich count.  Nevertheless, that you may see that it is not only
peasants who can carry things, I will take your bundle.  If
you will try it, said she, I shall be very glad.  You will
certainly have to walk for an hour, but what will that matter to
you, only you must carry the apples and pears as well.  The young
man felt somewhat uneasy when he heard of an hour's walk, but the
old woman would not let him off, packed the bundle on his back,
and hung the two baskets on his arm.  See, it is quite light, said
she.  No, it is not light, answered the count, and pulled a rueful
face.  Verily, the bundle weighs as heavily as if it were full of
cobblestones, and the apples and pears are as heavy as lead.  I
can scarcely breathe.  He had a mind to put everything down
again, but the old woman would not allow it.  Just look, said
she mockingly, the young gentleman will not carry what I, an old
woman, have so often dragged along.  You are ready with fine words,
but when it comes to be earnest, you want to take to your heels.
Why are you standing loitering there.  She continued, step out.
No one will take the bundle off again.  As long as he walked on
level ground, it was still bearable, but when they came to the hill
and had to climb, and the stones rolled down under his feet as if
they were alive, it was beyond his strength.  Drops of sweat stood
on his forehead, and ran, hot and cold, down his back.  Mother,
said he, I can go no farther.  I want to rest a little.  Not
here, answered the old woman, when we have arrived at our journey's
end, you can rest.  But now you must go forward.  Who knows
what good it may do you.  Old woman, you are becoming shameless,
said the count, and tried to throw off the bundle, but he labored
in vain.  It stuck as fast to his back as if it grew there.
He turned and twisted, but he could not get rid of it.  The old
woman laughed at this, and sprang about quite delighted on
her crutch.  Don't get angry, dear sir, said she, you are growing
as
red in the face as a turkey-cock.  Carry your bundle patiently.
I will give you a good present when we get home.
What could he do.  He was obliged to submit to his fate, and
crawl along patiently behind the old woman.  She seemed to grow
more and more nimble, and his burden still heavier.  All
at once she made a bound, jumped on to the bundle and seated
herself on the top of it.  And however withered she might be,
she was yet heavier than the stoutest country lass.  The
youth's knees trembled, but when he did not go on, the old woman
hit him about the legs with a switch and with stinging-nettles.
Groaning continually, he climbed the mountain, and at length
reached the old woman's house, when he was just about to drop.
When the geese perceived the old woman, they flapped their wings,
stretched out their necks, ran to meet her, cackling all the
while.  Behind the flock walked, stick in hand, an old wench,
strong and big, but ugly as night.  Good mother, said she to
the old woman, has anything happened to you, you have stayed
away so long.  By no means, my dear daughter, answered she,
I have met with nothing bad, but, on the contrary, with this
kind gentleman, who has carried my burden for me.  Only think,
he even took me on his back when I was
tired.  The way, too, has not seemed long to us.  We have been
merry, and have been cracking jokes with each other all the
time.  At last the old woman slid down, took the bundle off the
young man's back, and the baskets from his arm, looked at him
quite kindly, and said, now seat yourself on the bench before
the door, and rest.  You have fairly earned your wages, and they
shall not be wanting.  Then she said to the goose-girl, go
into the house, my dear daughter, it is not becoming for you
to be alone with a young gentleman.  One must not pour oil on to
the fire, he might fall in love with you.  The count knew not
whether to laugh or to cry.  Such a sweetheart as that, thought
he, could not touch my heart, even if she were thirty years
younger.  In the meantime the old woman stroked
and fondled her geese as if they were children, and then went
into the house with her daughter.  The youth lay down on the
bench, under a wild apple-tree.  The air was warm and mild.  On
all sides stretched a green meadow, which was set with cowslips,
wild thyme, and a thousand other flowers.  Through the midst
of it rippled a clear brook on which the sun sparkled, and
the white geese went walking backwards and forwards, or paddled in
the water.  It is quite delightful here, said he, but I am so
tired that I cannot keep my eyes open.  I will sleep a little.
If only a gust of wind does not come and blow my legs off my
body, for they are as rotten as tinder.
When he had slept a little while, the old woman came and shook
him till he awoke.  Sit up, said she, you can not stay here.  I
have certainly treated you ill enough, still it has not cost you
your life.  Of money and land you have no need, here is something
else for you.  Thereupon she thrust a little box into his hand,
which was cut out of a single emerald.  Take great care of it,
said she, it will bring you good fortune.  The count sprang up,
and as he felt that he was quite fresh, and had recovered his
vigor, he thanked the old woman for her present, and set off
without even once looking back at the beautiful daughter.  When
he was already some way off, he still heard in the distance the
noisy cry of the geese.
For three days the count had to wander in the wilderness before
he could find his way out.  He then reached a large town, and as
no
one knew him, he was led into the royal palace, where the king
and queen were sitting on their throne.  The count fell on one
knee, drew the emerald box out of his pocket, and laid it at the
queen's feet.  She bade him rise and hand her the little box.
Hardly, however, had she opened it, and looked therein, than she
fell as if dead to the ground.  The count was seized by the king's
servants, and was being led to prison, when the queen opened
her eyes, and ordered them to release him, and every one was to
go out, as she wished to speak with him in private.
When the queen was alone, she began to weep bitterly, and said,
of what use to me are the splendors and honors with which I am
surrounded.  Every morning I awake in pain and sorrow.  I had
three daughters, the youngest of whom was so beautiful that the
whole world looked on her as a wonder.  She was as white as snow,
as rosy as apple-blossom, and her hair as radiant as sun-beams.
When she cried, not tears fell from her eyes, but pearls and
jewels only.  When she was fifteen years old, the king summoned
all three sisters to come before his throne.  You should have seen
how all the people gazed when the youngest entered, it was just
as if the sun were rising.  Then the king spoke, my daughters,
I know not when my last day may arrive.  I will to-day decide what
each shall receive at my death.  You all love me, but the one
of you who loves me best, shall fare the best.  Each of them
said she loved him best.  Can you not express to me, said the king,
how much you do love me, and thus I shall see what you mean.  The
eldest spoke, I love my father as dearly as the sweetest sugar.
The second, I love my father as dearly as my prettiest dress.  But
the youngest was silent.  Then the father said, and you,
my dearest child, how much do you love me.  I do not know, and
can compare my love with nothing.  But her father insisted that
she should name something.  So she said at last, the best food
does not please me without salt, therefore I love my father
like salt.  When the king heard that, he fell into a passion, and
said, if you love me like salt, your love shall also be repaid you
with salt.  Then he divided the kingdom between the two elder,
but caused a sack of salt to be bound on the back of the
youngest, and two servants had to lead her forth into the
wild forest.  We all begged and prayed for her, said the queen,
but the king's anger was not to be appeased.  How she cried
when she had to leave us.  The whole road was strewn with the
pearls which flowed from her eyes.  The king soon afterwards
repented of his great severity, and had the whole forest
searched for the poor child, but no one could find her.  When
I think that the wild beasts have devoured her, I know not how
to contain myself for sorrow.  Many a time I console myself
with the hope that she is still alive, and may have hidden herself
in a cave, or has found shelter with compassionate people.  But
picture to yourself, when I opened your little emerald box, a
pearl lay therein, of exactly the same kind as those which used
to fall from my daughter's eyes.  And then you can also imagine
how the sight of it stirred my heart.  You must tell me how you
came by that pearl.  The count told her that he had received it
from the old woman in the forest, who had appeared very strange
to him, and must be a witch, but he had neither seen nor heard
anything of the queen's child.  The king and the queen resolved
to seek out the old woman.  They thought that there where the
pearl had been, they would obtain news of their daughter.

The old woman was sitting in that lonely place at her spinning-wheel
spinning.  It was already dusk, and a log which was burning
on the hearth gave a scanty light.  All at once there was a noise
outside, the geese were coming home from the pasture, and uttering
their hoarse cries.  Soon afterwards the daughter also entered.
But the old woman scarcely thanked her, and only shook her
head a little.  The daughter sat down beside her, took her
spinning-wheel, and twisted the threads as nimbly as a young girl.
Thus they both sat for two hours, and exchanged never a word.  At
last something rustled at the window and two fiery eyes peered
in.  It was an old night-owl, which cried 'uhu, three times.  The
old woman looked up just a little, then she said, now, my little
daughter, it is time for you to go out and do your work.  She rose
and went out, and where did she go.  Over the meadows ever onward
into the valley.  At last she came to a well, with three old
oak-trees standing beside it.  Meanwhile
the moon had risen large and round over the mountain, and
it was so light that one could have found a needle.  She removed
a skin which covered her face, then bent down to the well, and
began to wash herself.  When she had finished, she dipped the
skin also in the water, and then laid it on the meadow, so that
it should bleach in the moonlight, and dry again.  But how the
maiden was changed.  Such a change as that was never seen before.
When the gray mask fell off, her golden hair broke forth like
sun-beams, and spread about like a mantle over her whole form.
Her eyes shone out as brightly as the stars in heaven, and her
cheeks bloomed a soft red like apple-blossom.
But the fair maiden was sad.  She sat down and wept bitterly.
One tear after another forced itself out of her eyes, and rolled
through her long hair to the ground.  There she sat, and would
have remained sitting a long time, if there had not been a rustling
and cracking in the boughs of the neighboring tree.  She sprang
up like a roe which has been overtaken by the shot of the hunter.
Just then the moon was obscured by a dark cloud, and in an instant
the maiden had put on the old skin and vanished, like a light
blown out by the wind.
She ran back home, trembling like an aspen-leaf.  The old woman
was standing on the threshold, and the girl was about to relate
what had befallen her, but the old woman laughed kindly, and
said, I already know all.  She led her into the room and lighted
a new log.  She did not, however, sit down to her spinning again,
but fetched a broom and began to sweep and scour.  All must be
clean and sweet, she said to the girl.  But, mother, said the
maiden, why do you begin work at so late an hour.  What do you
expect.  Do you know then what time it is, asked the old woman.
Not yet midnight, answered the maiden, but already past eleven
o'clock.  Do you not remember, continued the old woman, that
it is three years to-day since you came to me.  Your time is up,
we can no longer remain together.  The girl was terrified, and
said, alas, dear mother, will you cast me off.  Where shall I go.
I have no friends, and no home to which I can go.  I have always
done as you
bade me, and you have always been satisfied with me.  Do not send
me away.  The old woman would not tell the maiden what lay before
her.  My stay here is over, she said to her, but when I depart,
house and parlor must be clean.  Therefore do not hinder me in
my work.  Have no care for yourself, you shall find a roof to
shelter you, and the wages which I will give you shall also
content you.  But tell me what is about to happen, the maiden
continued to entreat.  I tell you again, do not hinder me in my
work.  Do not say a word more, go to your chamber, take the skin
off your face, and put on the silken gown which you had on when
you came to me, and then wait in your chamber until I call you.
But I must once more tell of the king and queen, who had
journeyed forth with the count in order to seek out the old woman
in the wilderness.  The count had strayed away from them in the
wood by night, and had to walk onwards alone.  Next day it seemed
to him that he was on the right track.  He still went forward,
until darkness came on, then he climbed a tree, intending to
pass the night there, for he feared that he might lose his way.
When the moon illumined the surrounding country he perceived a
figure coming down the mountain.  She had no stick in her hand,
but yet he could see that it was the goose-girl, whom he had
seen before in the house of the old woman.  Oho, cried he, there
she comes, and if I once get hold of one of the witches, the
other shall not escape me.  But how astonished he was, when
she went to the well, took off the skin and washed herself,
when her golden hair fell down all about her, and she was
more beautiful than anyone whom he had ever seen in the whole
world.  He hardly dared to breathe, but stretched his head as
far forward through the leaves as he could, and stared at her.
Either he bent over too far, or whatever the cause might be, the
bough suddenly cracked, and that very moment the maiden slipped
into the skin, sprang away like a roe, and as the moon was
suddenly covered, disappeared from his sight.  Hardly had she
disappeared, before the count descended from the tree, and
hastened after her with nimble steps.  He had not been gone
long before he saw, in the twilight, two figures coming over
the meadow.
It was the king and queen, who had perceived from a distance the
light shining in the old woman's little house, and were going
to it.  The count told them what wonderful things he had seen
by the well, and they did not doubt that it had been their lost
daughter.  They walked onwards full of joy, and soon came to the
little house.  The geese were sitting all round it, and had
thrust their heads under their wings and were sleeping, and not
one of them moved.  The king and queen looked in at the window,
where the old woman was sitting quite quietly spinning, nodding
her head and never looking round.  The room was perfectly clean,
as if the little mist men, who carry no dust on their feet, lived
there.  Their daughter, however, they did not see.  They gazed at
all this for a long time, until at last they took heart, and
knocked softly at the window.  The old woman appeared to have
been expecting them.  She rose, and called out quite kindly,
come in.  I know you already.  When they had entered the room,
the old woman said, you might have spared yourself the long
walk, if you had not three years ago unjustly driven away
your child, who is so good and lovable.  No harm has come to her.
For three years she has had to tend the geese.  With them she has
learnt no evil, but has preserved her purity of heart.  You,
however, have been sufficiently punished by the misery in which
you have lived.  Then she went to the chamber and called, come
out, my little daughter.  Thereupon the door opened, and the
princess stepped out in her silken garments, with her golden
hair and her shining eyes, and it was as if an angel from heaven
had entered.
She went up to her father and mother, fell on their necks and
kissed them.  There was no help for it, they all had to weep for
joy.  The young count stood near them, and when she perceived him
she became as red in the face as a moss-rose, she herself did
not know why.  The king said, my dear child, I have given away
my kingdom, what shall I give you.  She needs nothing, said
the old woman.  I give her the tears that she has wept on your
account.  They are precious pearls, finer than those that are
found in the sea, and worth more than your whole kingdom, and I
give her my little
house as payment for her services.  When the old woman had said
that, she disappeared from their sight.  The walls rattled a
little, and when the king and queen looked round, the little
house had changed into a splendid palace, a royal table had been
spread, and the servants were running hither and thither.
The story goes still further, but my grandmother, who related
it to me, had partly lost her memory, and had forgotten the rest.
I shall always believe that the beautiful princess married the
count, and that they remained together in the palace, and
lived there in all happiness so long as God willed it.  Whether
the snow-white geese, which were kept near the little hut, were
verily young maidens no one need take offence, whom the old
woman had taken under her protection, and whether they now
received their human form again, and stayed as handmaids to the
young queen, I do not exactly know, but I suspect it.  This
much is certain, that the old woman was no witch, as people
thought, but a wise woman, who meant well.  Very likely it was
she who, at the princess's birth, gave her the gift of weeping
pearls instead of tears.  That does not happen nowadays, or else
the poor would soon become rich.
When adam and eve were driven out of paradise, they were
compelled to build a house for themselves on barren ground, and
eat their bread in the sweat of their brow.  Adam dug up the land,
and eve spun.  Every year eve brought a child into the world, but
the children were unlike each other, some pretty, and some ugly.
After a considerable time had gone by, God sent an angel to them,
to announce that he was coming to inspect their household.  Eve,
delighted that the lord should be so gracious, cleaned her
house diligently, decked it with flowers, and
strewed rushes on the floor.  Then she brought in her children,
but only the beautiful ones.  She washed and bathed them, combed
their hair, put clean raiment on them, and cautioned them to
conduct themselves decorously and modestly in the presence of the
Lord.  They were to bow down before him civilly, hold out their
hands, and to answer his questions modestly and sensibly.  The
ugly children, however, were not to let themselves be seen.  One
hid himself beneath the hay, another under the roof, a third
in the straw, the fourth in the stove, the fifth in the cellar,
the sixth under a tub, the seventh beneath the wine-cask, the
eighth under an old fur cloak, the ninth and tenth beneath the
cloth out of which she always made their clothes, and the
eleventh and twelfth under the leather out of which she cut
their shoes.  She had scarcely got ready, before there was a
knock at the house-door.  Adam looked through a chink, and saw
that it was the Lord.  Adam opened the door respectfully,
and the heavenly father entered.  There, in a row, stood the
pretty children, and bowed before him, held out their hands,
and knelt down.  The Lord, however, began to bless them, laid
his hands on the first, and said, thou shalt be a powerful king,
and to the second, thou a prince, to the third, thou a
count, to the fourth, thou a knight, to the fifth, thou
a nobleman, to the sixth, thou a burgher, to the seventh, thou
a merchant, to the eighth, thou a learned man.  He bestowed
upon them also all his richest blessings.  When eve saw that
the Lord was so mild and gracious, she thought, I will bring
hither my ill-favored children also, it may be that he will
bestow his blessing on them likewise.
So she ran and brought them out of the hay, the straw, the
stove, and wherever else she had concealed them.  Then came the
whole coarse, dirty, scabby, sooty band.  The Lord smiled,
looked at them all, and said, I will bless these also.  He laid
his hands on the first, and said to him, thou shalt be a peasant,
to the second, thou a fisherman, to the third,
thou a smith, to the fourth, thou a tanner, to the fifth, thou
a weaver, to the sixth, thou a shoemaker, to the seventh, thou
a tailor, to the eighth, thou a potter, to the ninth, thou a
waggoner, to the tenth, thou a sailor, to the eleventh, thou
a messenger, to the twelfth, thou a scullion all the days of
thy life.
When eve had heard all this she said, Lord, how unequally thou
dividest thy gifts.  After all they are all of them my children,
whom I have brought into the world, thy favors should be given
to all alike.  But God answered, eve, thou dost not understand.
It is right and necessary that the entire world should be
supplied from thy children.  If they were all princes and lords,
who would grow corn, thresh it, grind and bake it.  Who would
be blacksmiths, weavers, carpenters, masons, laborers, tailors
and seamstresses.  Each shall have his own place, so that one
shall support the other, and all shall be fed like the limbs of
one body.  Then eve answered, ah, Lord, forgive me, I was too
quick in speaking to thee.  Have thy divine will with my children.
There was once upon a time a miller who lived with his wife
in great contentment.  They had money and land, and their
prosperity increased year by year more and more.  But ill
luck comes like a thief in the night.  As their wealth had
increased so did it again decrease, year by year, and at last
the miller could
hardly call the mill in which he lived, his own.  He was in great
distress, and when he lay down after his day's work, found no
rest, but tossed about in his bed, sorely troubled.  One
morning he rose before daybreak and went out into the open air,
thinking that perhaps there his heart might become lighter.  As
he was stepping over the mill-dam the first sunbeam was just
breaking forth, and he heard a rippling sound in the pond.  He
turned round and perceived a beautiful woman, rising slowly out
of the water.  Her long hair, which she was holding off her
shoulders with her soft hands, fell down on both sides,
and covered her white body.  He soon saw that she was the
nixie of the mill-pond, and in his fright did not know whether
he should run away or stay where he was.  But the nixie made her
sweet voice heard, called him by his name, and asked him why he
was so sad.  The miller was at first struck dumb, but when he heard
her speak so kindly, he took heart, and told her how he had
formerly lived in wealth and happiness, but that now he was so
poor that he did not know what to do.  Be easy, answered the nixie,
I will make you richer and happier than you have ever been
before, only you must promise to give me the young thing which
has just been born in your house.  What else can that be, thought
the miller, but a puppy or a kitten, and he promised her what she
desired.  The nixie descended into the water again, and he
hurried back to his mill, consoled and in good spirits.  He had
not yet reached it, when the maid-servant came out of the house
and cried to him to rejoice, for his wife had given birth to
a little boy.  The miller stood as if struck by lightning.  He
saw very well that the cunning nixie had been aware of it, and had
cheated him.  Hanging his head, he went up to his wife's bedside
and when she said, why do you not rejoice over the fine boy, he
told her what had befallen him, and what kind of a promise he had
given to the nixie.  Of what use to me are riches and prosperity,
he added, if I am to lose my child.  But what can I do.  Even the
relatives, who had come thither to wish them joy, did not know
what to say.  In the meantime prosperity again returned to the
miller's house.  All that he undertook succeeded.  It was as
if presses and coffers filled themselves
of their own accord, and as if money multiplied nightly in the
cupboards.  It was not long before his wealth was greater than
it had ever been before.  But he could not rejoice over it
untroubled, for the bargain which he had made with the nixie
tormented his soul.  Whenever he passed the mill-pond, he feared
she might ascend and remind him of his debt.  He never let the
boy himself go near the water.  Beware, he said to him, if you
do but touch the water, a hand will rise, seize you, and draw you
down.  But as year after year went by and the nixie did not show
herself again, the miller began to feel at ease.  The boy grew
up to be a youth and was apprenticed to a huntsman.  When he had
learnt everything, and had become an excellent huntsman, the
lord of the village took him into his service.  In the village
lived a beautiful and true-hearted maiden, who pleased the
huntsman, and when his master perceived that, he gave him a
little house, the two were married, lived peacefully and
happily, and loved each other with all their hearts.
One day the huntsman was chasing a roe.  And when the animal
turned aside from the forest into the open country, he pursued
it and at last shot it.  He did not notice that he was now in
the neighborhood of the dangerous mill-pond, and went, after
he had disembowelled the roe, to the water, in order to wash
his blood-stained hands.  Scarcely, however, had he dipped
them in than the nixie ascended, smilingly wound her dripping
arms around him, and drew him quickly down under the waves,
which closed over him.  When it was evening, and the huntsman
did not return home, his wife became alarmed.  She went out to
seek him, and as he had often told her that he had to be on
his guard against the snares of the nixie, and dared not venture
into the neighborhood of the mill-pond, she already suspected
what had happened.  She hastened to the water, and
when she found his hunting-pouch lying on the shore, she could
no longer have any doubt of the misfortune.  Lamenting her
sorrow, and wringing her hands, she called on her beloved
by name, but in vain.  She hurried across to the other side
of the pond, and called him anew.  She reviled the nixie with
harsh words, but no answer greeted her.  The surface of the water
remained calm, only the crescent moon stared steadily back at
her.  The poor woman did not leave the pond.  With hasty steps,
she paced round and round it, without resting a moment, sometimes
in silence, sometimes uttering a loud cry, sometimes sobbing
softly.  At last her strength came to an end, she sank down
to the ground and fell into a heavy sleep.  Presently a dream
took possession of her.
She was anxiously climbing upwards between great masses of
rock.  Thorns and briars caught her feet, the rain beat in her
face, and the wind tossed her long hair about.  When she had
reached the summit, quite a different sight presented itself
to her.  The sky was blue, the air soft, the ground sloped
gently downwards, and on a green meadow, gay with flowers of
every color, stood a pretty cottage.  She went up to it and
opened the door.  There sat an old woman
with white hair, who beckoned to her kindly.  At that very
moment, the poor woman awoke, day had already dawned, and she
at once resolved to act in accordance with her dream.  She
laboriously climbed the mountain.  Everything was exactly as she
had seen it in the night.  The old woman received her kindly,
and pointed out a chair on which she might sit.  You must have
met with a misfortune, she said, since you have sought out my
lonely cottage.  With tears, the woman related what had befallen
her.  Be comforted, said the old woman, I will help you.  Here
is a golden comb for you.  Tarry till the full moon has risen,
then go to the mill-pond, seat yourself on the shore, and
comb your long black hair with this comb.  When you have done,
lay it down on the bank, and you will see what will happen.  The
woman returned home, but the time till the full moon came, passed
slowly.  When at last the shining disc appeared in the heavens,
she went out to the mill-pond, sat down and combed her long black
hair with the golden comb, and when she had finished, she laid
it down at the water's edge.  It was not long before there
was a movement in the depths, a wave rose, rolled to the shore,
and bore the comb away with it.  In not more than the time
necessary for the comb to sink to the bottom, the surface of
the water parted, and the head of the huntsman arose.  He did
not speak, but looked at his wife with sorrowful glances.
At the same instant, a second wave came rushing up, and covered
the man's head.  All had vanished, the mill-pond lay peaceful as
before, and nothing but the face of the full moon shone on it.
Full of sorrow, the woman went back, but again the dream showed
her the cottage of the old woman.  Next morning she again set
out and complained of her woes to the wise woman.  The old
woman gave her a golden flute, and said, tarry till the full
moon comes again, then take this flute.  Play a beautiful air
on it, and when you have finished, lay it on the sand.  Then
you will see what will happen.  The wife did as the old woman
told her.  No sooner was the flute lying on the sand than there
was a stirring in the depths, and a wave rushed up and bore
the flute away with it.  Immediately afterwards the water
parted, and not only the head of the man, but
half of his body also arose.  He stretched out his arms
longingly towards her, but a second wave came up, covered him,
and drew him down again.  Alas, what does it help me, said the
unhappy woman, that I should see my beloved, only to lose him
again.  Despair filled her heart anew, but the dream led her
a third time to the house of the old woman.  She set out, and
the wise woman gave her a golden spinning-wheel, consoled her and
said, all is not yet fulfilled, tarry until the time of the full
moon, then take the spinning-wheel, seat yourself on the shore,
and spin the spool full, and when you have done that, place the
spinning-wheel near the water, and you will see what will happen.
The woman obeyed all she said exactly.  As soon as the full moon
showed itself, she carried the golden spinning-wheel to the
shore, and span industriously until the flax came to an end, and
the spool was quite filled with the threads.  No sooner was the
wheel standing on the shore than there was a more violent movement
than before in the depths of the pond, and a mighty wave rushed
up, and bore the wheel away with it.  Immediately the head and
the whole body of the man rose into the air, in a water-spout.
He quickly sprang to the shore, caught his wife by the hand and
fled.  But they had scarcely gone a very little distance,
when the whole pond rose with a frightful roar, and streamed
out over the open country.  The fugitives already saw death
before their eyes, when the woman in her terror implored the
help of the old woman, and in an instant they were transformed,
she into a toad, he into a frog.  The flood which had overtaken
them could not destroy them, but it tore them apart and carried
them far away.
When the water had dispersed and they both touched dry land again,
they regained their human form, but neither knew where the other
was.  They found themselves among strange people, who did not
know their native land.  High mountains and deep valleys lay
between them.  In order to keep themselves alive, they were
both obliged to tend sheep.  For many long years they drove
their flocks through field and forest and were full of sorrow
and longing.
When spring had once more broken forth on the earth, they both
went out one day with their flocks, and as chance would have it,
they drew near each other.  They met in a valley, but did not
recognize each other.  Yet they rejoiced that they were no
longer so lonely.  Henceforth they each day drove their flocks
to the same place.  They did not speak much, but they felt
comforted.  One evening when the full moon was shining in the
sky, and the sheep were already at rest, the shepherd pulled
the flute out of his pocket, and played on it a beautiful but
sorrowful air.  When he had finished he saw that the shepherdess
was weeping bitterly.  Why are you weeping, he asked.  Alas,
answered she, thus shone the full moon when I played this air
on the flute for the last time, and the head of my beloved
rose out of the water.  He looked at her, and it seemed as if a
veil fell from his eyes, and he recognized his dear wife, and
when she looked at him, and the moon shone in his face she
knew him also.  They embraced and kissed each other, and no one
need ask if they were happy.
There was once a poor shepherd-boy whose father and mother
were dead, and he was placed by the authorities in the house
of a rich man, who was to feed him and bring him up.  The man and
his wife, however, had bad hearts, and were greedy and jealous of
their riches, and vexed whenever anyone put a morsel of their
bread in his mouth.  The poor young fellow might do what he
liked, he got little to eat, but only so many blows the more.
One day he had to watch a hen and her chickens, but she escaped
through a hedge with them, and a hawk darted down instantly,
and carried her off through the air.  The boy called, thief,
thief, rascal, with all the strength of his body.  But what good
did that do.  The hawk did not bring its prey back again.  The
man heard the noise, and ran to the spot, and as soon as he
saw that his hen was gone, he fell in a rage, and gave the boy
such a beating that he could not stir for two days.  Then he
had to take care of the chickens without the hen, but now his
difficulty was greater, for one ran here and the other there.
He thought he was doing a very wise thing when he tied them
all together with a string, because then the hawk would not
be able to steal any of them away from him.  But he was very
much mistaken.  After two days, worn out with running about and
hunger, he fell asleep.  The bird of prey came, and seized one
of the chickens, and as the others were tied fast to it, it
carried them all off together, perched itself on a tree, and
devoured them.  The farmer was just coming home, and when he saw
the misfortune, he got angry and beat the boy so unmercifully
that he was forced to lie in bed for several days.
When he was on his legs again, the farmer said to him, you are
too stupid for me, I cannot make a herdsman of you, you must
go as errand-boy.  Then he sent him to the judge, to whom he
was to carry a basketful of grapes, and he gave him a letter as
well.  On the way hunger and thirst tormented the unhappy boy
so violently that he ate two grapes.  He took the basket to the
judge, but when the judge had read the letter, and counted the
grapes he said, two are missing.  The boy confessed quite honestly
that, driven by hunger and thirst, he had devoured the two which
were missing.  The judge wrote a letter to the farmer, and asked
for the same number of grapes again.  These also the boy had
to take to him with a letter.  As he again was so extremely
hungry and thirsty, he could not help it, and again ate two grapes.
But first he took the letter out of the basket, put it under a
stone and seated himself thereon in order that the letter might
not see and betray him.  The judge, however, again made him give
an explanation about the missing grapes.  Ah, said the boy,
how have you learnt that.  The letter could not know about it,
for I put it under a stone before I did it.  The judge could
not help laughing at the boy's simplicity, and sent the man a
letter wherein he cautioned him to look after the poor boy better,
and not let him want for meat and drink, and also that he was to
teach him what was right and what was wrong.
I will soon show you the difference, said the hard man, if
you will eat, you must work, and if you do anything wrong, you
shall be quite sufficiently taught by blows.
The next day he set him a hard task.  He was to chop two bundles
of hay for food for the horses, and then the man threatened, in
five hours, said he, I shall be back again, and if the hay
is not chopped by that time, I will beat you until you can not
move a limb.  The
farmer went with his wife, the man-servant and the girl, to the
yearly fair, and left nothing behind for the boy but a small bit
of bread.  The boy seated himself on the bench, and began to
work with all his might.  As he got warm over it he put his little
coat off and threw it on the hay.  In his terror lest he should
not get done in time he kept constantly cutting, and in his
haste, without noticing it, he chopped his little coat as well as
the hay.  He became aware of the misfortune too late.  There was
no repairing it.  Ah, cried he, now all is over with me.  The
wicked man did not threaten me for nothing.  If he comes back
and sees what I have done, he will kill me.  Rather than that I
will take my own life.
The boy had once heard the farmer's wife say, I have a pot
with poison in it under my bed.  She, however, had only said
that to keep away greedy people, for there was honey in it.
The boy crept under the bed, brought out the pot, and ate all
that was in it.  I do not know, said he, folks say death is
bitter, but it tastes very sweet to me.  It is no wonder
that the farmer's wife has so often longed for death.  He seated
himself in a little chair, and was prepared to die.  But instead
of becoming weaker he felt himself strengthened by the nourishing
food.  It cannot have been poison, thought he, but the
farmer once said there was a small bottle of poison for flies in
the closet in which he keeps his clothes.  That, no doubt, will
be the true poison, and bring death to me.  It was, however, no
poison for flies, but hungarian wine.  The boy got out the bottle,
and emptied it.  This death tastes sweet too, said he, but shortly
after when the wine began to mount into his brain and stupefy
him, he thought his end was drawing near.  I feel that I must die,
said he, I will go away to the churchyard, and seek a grave.  He
staggered out, reached the churchyard, and laid himself in a newly
dug grave.  He lost his senses more and more.  In the neighborhood
was an inn where a wedding was being held.  When he heard the
music, he fancied he was already in paradise, until at length
he lost all consciousness.  The poor boy never awoke again.  The
heat of the strong wine and the cold night-dew deprived him of
life, and he remained in the grave in which he had laid himself.
When the farmer heard the news of the boy's death he was terrified,
and afraid of being brought to justice - indeed, his distress took
such a powerful hold of him that he fell fainting to the ground.
His wife, who was standing by the hearth with a pan of hot fat,
ran to him to help him.  But the flames enveloped the pan, the
whole house caught fire, in a few hours it lay in ashes, and
the rest of the years they had to live they passed in poverty
and misery, tormented by the pangs of conscience.
There was once upon a time a girl who was young and beautiful, but
she had lost her mother when she was quite a child, and her
step-mother did all she could to make the girl's life wretched.
Whenever this woman gave her anything to do, she worked at it
indefatigably, and did everything that lay in her
power.  Still she could not touch the heart of the wicked woman,
she was never satisfied, it was never enough.  The harder the girl
worked, the more work was put upon her, and all that the woman
thought of was how to weigh her down with still heavier burdens,
and make her life still more miserable.
One day she said to her, here are twelve pounds of feathers which
you must pick, and if they are not done this evening, you may
expect a good beating.  Do you imagine you are to idle away the
whole day.  The poor girl sat down to the work, but tears ran
down her cheeks as she did so, for she saw plainly enough that it
was quite impossible to finish the work in one day.  Whenever she
had a little heap of feathers lying before her, and she sighed or
smote her hands together in her anguish, they flew away, and she
had to pick them up again, and begin her work anew. Then she put
her elbows on the table, laid her face in her two hands, and cried,
is there no one, then, on God's earth to have pity on me.  Then
she heard a low voice which said, be comforted, my child, I have
come to help you.  The maiden looked up, and an old woman was by
her side.  She took the girl kindly by the hand, and said, only
tell me what is troubling you.  As she spoke so kindly, the girl
told her of her miserable life, and how one burden after another
was laid upon her, and she never could get to the end of the work
which was given to her.  If I have not done these feathers by this
evening, my step-mother will beat me, she has threatened she will,
and I know she keeps her word.  Her tears began to flow again, but
the good old woman said, do not be afraid, my child, rest a while,
and in the meantime I will look to your work.  The girl lay
down on her bed, and soon fell asleep.  The old woman seated
herself at the table with the feathers, and how they did fly off
the quills, which she scarcely touched with her withered hands.
The twelve pounds were soon finished, and when the girl awoke,
great snow-white heaps were lying, piled up, and everything in
the room was neatly cleared away, but the old woman had
vanished.  The maiden thanked God, and sat still till evening
came, when the step-mother came in and marveled to see the work
completed.  Just look, you
awkward creature, said she, what can be done when people are
industrious, and why could you not set about something else.
There you sit with your hands crossed.  When she went out she
said, the creature is worth more than her salt.  I must give her
some work that is still harder.
Next morning she called the girl, and said there is a spoon for
you.  With that you must empty out the great pond which is
beside the garden, and if it is not done by night, you know what
will happen.  The girl took the spoon, and saw that it was full
of holes, but even if it had not been, she never could have
emptied the pond with it.  She set to work at once, knelt down
by the water, into which her tears were falling, and began to
empty it.  But the good old woman appeared again, and when she
learnt the cause of her grief, she said, be of good cheer, my
child.  Go into the thicket and lie down and sleep, I will soon
do your work.  As soon as the old woman was alone, she barely
touched the pond, and a vapor rose up on high from the water, and
mingled itself with the clouds.  Gradually the pond was emptied,
and when the maiden awoke before sunset and came thither, she saw
nothing but the fishes which were struggling in the mud.  She
went to her step-mother, and showed her that the work was done.
It ought to have been done long before this, said she, and grew
white with anger, but she meditated something new.
On the third morning she said to the girl, you must build me a
castle on the plain there, and it must be ready by the
evening.  The maiden was dismayed, and said, how can I complete
such a great work.  I will endure no opposition, screamed the
step-mother.  If you can empty a pond with a spoon that is full of
holes, you can build a castle too.  I will take possession of
it this very day, and if anything is wanting, even if it be the
most trifling thing in the kitchen or cellar, you know what lies
before you.  She drove the girl out, and when she entered the
valley, the rocks were there, piled up one above the other, and
all her strength would not have enabled her even to move the very
smallest of them.  She sat down and wept, and still she hoped the
old woman would help her.  The old woman was not long in coming,
she comforted her and said, lie down
there in the shade and sleep, and I will soon build the castle for
you.  If it would be a pleasure to you, you can live in it
yourself.  When the maiden had gone away, the old woman touched the
gray rocks.  They began to rise, moved together and stood there as
if giants had built the walls, and on these the building arose
and it seemed as if countless hands were working invisibly, and
placing one stone upon another.  There was a dull heavy noise from
the ground, pillars arose of their own accord on high, and
placed themselves in order near each other.  The tiles laid
themselves in order on the roof, and when noon-day came, the
great weather-cock was already turning itself on the summit of the
tower, like a golden maid with fluttering garments.  The inside
of the castle was being finished while evening was drawing near.
How the old woman managed it, I know not, but the walls of the
rooms were hung with silk and velvet, embroidered chairs were
there, and richly ornamented arm-chairs by marble tables,
crystal chandeliers hung down from the ceilings, and mirrored
themselves in the smooth floor, green parrots were there in gilt
cages, and so were strange birds which sang most beautifully, and
there was on all sides as much magnificence as if a king were
going to live there.  The sun was just setting when the girl
awoke, and the brightness of a thousand lights flashed in her
face.  She hurried to the castle, and entered by the open door.
The steps were spread with red cloth, and the golden
balustrade beset with flowering trees.  When she saw the
splendor of the rooms, she stood as if turned to stone.  Who
knows how long she might have stood there if she had not
remembered the step-mother.  Alas, she said to herself, if she
could but be satisfied at last, and would give up making my life
a misery to me.  The girl went and told her that the castle was
ready.  I will move into it at once, said she, and rose from her
seat.  When they entered the castle, she was forced to hold her
hand before her eyes, the brilliancy of everything was so
dazzling.  You see, said she to the girl, how easy it has been
for you to do this, I ought to have given you something harder.
She went through all the rooms, and examined every corner to
see if anything was wanting or defective, but she could
discover nothing.  Now we will go down below, said she, looking
at the girl with malicious eyes.  The kitchen and the cellar
still have to be examined and if you have forgotten anything you
shall not escape your punishment.  But the fire was burning on
the hearth, and the meat was cooking in the pans, the tongs and
shovel were leaning against the wall, and the shining brazen
utensils all arranged in sight.  Nothing was missing, not even
a coal-box and a water-pail.  Which is the way to the cellar,
she cried.  If that is not abundantly filled with wine casks
it shall go ill with you.  She herself raised up the trap-door
and descended, but she had hardly made two steps before the
heavy trap-door which was only laid back, fell down.  The girl
heard a scream, lifted up the door very quickly to go to her
aid, but she had fallen down, and the girl found her lying
lifeless at the bottom.
And now the magnificent castle belonged to the girl alone.  She
at first did not know how to reconcile herself to her good
fortune.  Beautiful dresses were hanging in the wardrobes, the
chests were filled with gold and silver, or with pearls and
jewels, and she never felt a desire that she was not able to
gratify.  And soon the fame of the beauty and riches of the
maiden went over all the world.  Wooers presented themselves
daily but none pleased her.  At length the son of the king came
and he knew how to touch her heart, and she betrothed herself
to him.  In the garden of the castle was a lime-tree, under
which they were one day sitting together, when he said to her,
I will go home and obtain my father's consent to our marriage.
I entreat you to wait for me under this lime-tree, I shall be
back with you in a few hours.  The maiden kissed him on his
left cheek, and said, keep true to me, and never let any one else
kiss you on this cheek.  I will wait here under the lime-tree
until you return.
The maid stayed beneath the lime-tree until sunset, but he did
not return.  She sat three days from morning till evening,
waiting for him, but in vain.  As he still was not there by the
fourth day, she said, some accident has assuredly befallen him.
I will go out and seek him, and will not come back until I have
found him.
She packed up three of her most beautiful dresses, one embroidered
with bright stars, the second with silver moons, the third with
golden suns, tied up a handful of jewels in her handkerchief,
and set out.  She inquired everywhere for her betrothed, but no
one had seen him, no one knew anything about him.  Far and wide
did she wander through the world, but she found him not.  At
last she hired herself to a farmer as a cowherd, and buried her
dresses and jewels beneath a stone.
And now she lived as a herdswoman, guarded her herd, and was
very sad and full of longing for her beloved.  She had a little
calf which she taught to know her, and fed it out of her own
hand, and when she said,
     little calf, little calf, kneel by my side,
     and do not forget your cowherd-maid,
     as the prince forgot his betrothed bride,
     who waited for him 'neath the lime-tree's shade.
The little calf knelt down, and she stroked it.
And when she had lived for a couple of years alone and full of
grief, a report was spread over all the land that the king's
daughter was about to celebrate her marriage.  The road to the
town passed through the village where the maiden was living, and
it came to pass that once when the maiden was driving out her
herd, the bridegroom traveled by.  He was sitting proudly on his
horse, and never looked round, but when she saw him she recognized
her beloved, and it was just as if a sharp knife had pierced her
heart.  Alas, said she, I believed him true to me, but he has
forgotten me.
Next day he again came along the road.  When he was near her
she said to the little calf,
     little calf, little calf, kneel by my side,
     and do not forget your cowherd-maid,
     as the prince forgot his betrothed bride,
     who waited for him 'neath the lime-tree's shade.
When he was aware of the voice, he looked down and reined in
his horse.  He looked into the girl's face and then put his hands
before his eyes as if he were trying to remember something, but he
soon rode onwards and was out of sight.  Alas, said she, he no
longer knows me.  And her grief was ever greater.
Soon after this a great festival three days long was to be held at
the king's court, and the whole country was invited to it.
Now will I try my last chance, thought the maiden, and when
evening came she went to the stone under which she had buried her
treasures.  She took out the dress with the golden suns, put it on,
and adorned herself with the jewels.  She let down her hair, which
she had concealed under a handkerchief, and it fell down in long
curls about her, and thus she went into the town, and in the
darkness was observed by no one.  When she entered the brightly
lighted hall, every one started back in amazement, but no one knew
who she was.  The king's son went to meet her, but he did not
recognize her.  He led her out to dance, and was so enchanted with
her beauty, that he thought no more of the other bride.  When the
feast was over, she vanished in the crowd, and hastened before
daybreak to the village, where she once more put on her herd's
dress.
Next evening she took out the dress with the silver moons, and
put a half-moon made of precious stones in her hair.  When she
appeared at the festival, all eyes were turned upon her, but the
king's son hastened to meet her, and filled with love for her,
danced with her alone, and no longer so much as glanced at anyone
else.  Before she went away she was forced to promise him to
come again to the festival on the last evening.
When she appeared for the third time, she wore the star-dress
which sparkled at every step she took, and her hair-ribbon and
girdle were starred with jewels.  The prince had already been
waiting for her for a long time, and forced his way up to her.
Do but tell who you are, said he, I feel just as if I had already
known you a long time.  Do you not know what I did when you left
me.  Then she stepped up to him, and kissed him on his left cheek,
and in a moment it was as if scales fell from his eyes, and he
recognized the true bride.  Come, said he to her, here I stay no
longer, gave her his hamd, and led her down to the carriage.  The
horses hurried
away to the magic castle as if the wind had been harnessed to the
carriage.  The illuminated windows already shone in the distance.
When they drove past the lime-tree, countless glow-worms were
swarming about it.  It shook its branches, and sent forth their
fragrance.  On the steps flowers were blooming, and the room
echoed with the song of strange birds, but in the hall the entire
court was assembled, and the priest was waiting to marry the
bridegroom and the true bride.
There was once a girl whose father and mother died while
she was still a little child.  All alone, in a small house at the
end of the village, dwelt her godmother, who supported herself
by spinning, weaving, and sewing.  The old woman took the
forlorn child to live with her, kept her to her work, and educated
her in all that is good.  When the girl was fifteen years old,
the old woman became ill, called the child to her bedside,
and said, dear daughter, I feel my end drawing near.  I leave you
the little house, which will protect you from wind and weather, and
my spindle, shuttle, and needle, with which you can earn your
bread.  Then she laid her hands on the girl's head, blessed her,
and said, only preserve the love of God in your heart, and all will
go well with you.  Thereupon she closed her eyes, and when she was
laid in the earth, the maiden followed the coffin, weeping
bitterly, and paid her the last mark of respect.
And now the maiden lived quite alone in the little house, and
was industrious, and spun, wove, and sewed, and the blessing of the
good old woman was on all that she did.  It seemed as if the flax
in the room increased of its own accord, and whenever she wove a
piece of cloth or carpet, or had made a shirt, she at once found
a buyer who paid her amply for it, so that she was in want of
nothing, and even had something to share with others.
About this time, the son of the king was traveling about the
country looking for a bride.  He was not to choose a poor one, and
did not want to have a rich one.  So he said, she shall be my wife
who is the poorest, and at the same time the richest.  When he came
to the village where the maiden dwelt, he inquired, as he did
wherever he went, who was the richest and also the poorest girl in
the place.  They first named the richest.  The poorest, they said,
was the girl who lived in the small house quite at the end of the
village.  The rich girl was sitting in all her splendor before the
door of her house, and when the prince approached her, she got up,
went to meet him, and made him a low curtsy.  He looked at her,
said nothing, and rode on.  When he came to the house of the poor
girl, she was not standing at the door, but sitting in her little
room.  He stopped his horse, and saw through the window, on which
the bright sun was shining, the girl sitting at her spinning-wheel,
busily spinning.  She looked up, and when she saw that the prince
was looking in, she blushed all over her face, let her eyes fall,
and went on spinning.  I do not know whether, just at that
moment, the thread was quite even, but she went on spinning until
the king's son had ridden away again.  Then she went to the
window, opened it, and said, it is so warm in this room, and she
looked after him as long as she could distinguish the white
feathers in his hat.  Then she sat down to work again in her room
and went on with her spinning, and a saying which the old woman
had often repeated when she was
sitting at her work, came into her mind, and she sang these
words to herself,
     spindle, my spindle, haste, haste thee away,
     and here to my house bring the wooer, I pray.
And what do you think happened.  The spindle sprang out of her
hand in an instant, and out of the door, and when, in her
astonishment, she got up and looked after it, she saw that it was
dancing out merrily into the open country, and drawing a shining
gold thread after it.  Before long, it had entirely vanished from
her sight.  As she had now no spindle, the girl took the weaver's
shuttle in her hand, sat down to her loom, and began to weave.
The spindle, however, danced continually onwards, and just as
the thread came to an end, reached the prince.  What do I see, he
cried, the spindle certainly wants to show me the way, turned
his horse about, and rode back with the golden thread.  The girl
however, was sitting at her work singing,
     shuttle, my shuttle, weave well this day,
     and guide the wooer to me, I pray.
Immediately the shuttle sprang out of her hand and out by the door.
Before the threshold, however, it began to weave a carpet which
was more beautiful than the eyes of man had ever yet beheld.
Lilies and roses blossomed on both sides of it, and on a golden
ground in the center green branches ascended, under which bounded
hares and rabbits, stags and deer stretched their heads in
between them, brightly-colored birds were sitting in the branches
above, they lacked nothing but the gift of song.  The shuttle
leapt hither and thither, and everything seemed to grow of
its own accord.
As the shuttle had run away, the girl sat down to sew.  She held
the needle in her hand and sang,
     needle, my needle, sharp-pointed and fine,
     prepare for the wooer this house of mine.
Then the needle leapt out of her fingers, and flew everywhere
about the room as quick as lightning.  It was just as if
invisible spirits were working, it covered tables and benches
with green cloth in an instant,
and the chairs with velvet, and hung the windows with silken
curtains.  Hardly had the needle put in the last stitch than the
maiden saw through the window the white feathers of the prince,
whom the spindle had brought thither by the golden thread.  He
alighted, stepped over the carpet into the house, and when he
entered the room, there stood the maiden in her poor garments, but
she shone out from within them like a rose surrounded by leaves.
You are the poorest and also the richest, said he to her.  Come
with me, you shall be my bride.  She did not speak, but she gave
him her hand.  Then he gave her a kiss, led her forth, lifted her
on to his horse, and took her to the royal castle, where the
wedding was solemnized with great rejoicings.  The spindle,
shuttle, and needle were preserved in the treasure-chamber,
and held in great honor.
There was once upon a time a princess, who, high under the
battlements in her castle, had an apartment with twelve windows,
which looked out in every possible direction, and when she climbed
up to it and looked around her, she could inspect her whole kingdom.
When she looked out of the first, her sight was more keen than that
of any other human being, from the second she could see still
better, from the third more distinctly still, and so it went on,
until the twelfth, from which she saw everything above the earth
and under the earth, and nothing at all could be
kept secret from her.  Moreover, as she was haughty, and would be
subject to no one, but wished to keep the dominion for herself
alone, she caused it to be proclaimed that no one should ever be
her husband who could not conceal himself from her so effectively,
that it should be quite impossible for her to find him.  He who
tried this, however, and was discovered by her, was to have his
head struck off, and stuck on a post.  Ninety-seven posts with the
heads of dead men were already standing before the castle, and no
one had come forward for a long time.  The princess was delighted,
and thought to herself, now I shall be free as long as I live.
Then three brothers appeared before her, and announced to her
that they were desirous of trying their luck.  The eldest believed
he would be quite safe if he crept into a lime-pit, but she saw
him from the first window, made him come out, and had his head
cut off.  The second crept into the cellar of the palace, but she
perceived him also from the first window, and his fate was sealed.
His head was placed on the nine and ninetieth post.  Then the
youngest came to her and entreated her to give him a day for
consideration, and also to be so gracious as to overlook it if she
should happen to discover him twice, but if he failed the third
time, he would look on his life as over.  As he was so handsome,
and begged so earnestly, she said, yes, I will grant you that, but
you will not succeed.
Next day he meditated for a long time how he should hide
himself, but all in vain.  Then he seized his gun and went out
hunting.  He saw a raven, took a good aim at him, and was just
going to fire, when the bird cried, don't shoot, I will reward
you.  He put his gun down, went on, and came to a lake where he
surprised a large fish which had come up from the depths below
to the surface of the water.  When he had aimed at it, the fish
cried, don't shoot, and I will reward you.  He allowed it to dive
down again, went onwards, and met a fox which was lame.  He
fired and missed it, and the fox cried, you had much better come
here and draw the thorn out of my foot for me.  He did this, but
when he wanted to kill the fox and skin it, the fox said, stop,
and I will reward you.  The youth let him go, and then as it
was evening, returned home.
Next day he was to hide himself, but no matter how he puzzled
his brains over it, he did not know where.  He went into the
forest to the raven and said, I let you live on, so now tell me
where I am to hide myself, so that the king's daughter will not
see me.  The raven hung his head and thought it over for a long
time.  At length he croaked, I have it.  He fetched an egg out of
his nest, cut it into two parts, and shut the youth inside it,
then made it whole again, and seated himself on it.  When the
king's daughter went to the first window she could not discover
him, nor could she from the others, and she began to be uneasy,
but from the eleventh she saw him.  She ordered the raven to be
shot, and the egg to be brought and broken, and the youth was
forced to come out.  She said, for once you are excused, but if
you do not better than this, you are lost.  Next day he went to
the lake, called the fish to him and said, I suffered you to live,
now tell me where to hide myself so that the king's daughter
may not see me.  The fish thought for a while, and at last
cried, I have it, I will shut you up in my stomach.  He
swallowed him, and went down to the bottom of the lake.  The
king's daughter looked through her windows, and even from the
eleventh did not see him, and was alarmed, but at length from
the twelfth she saw him.  She ordered the fish to be caught and
killed, and then the youth appeared.  It is easy to imagine the
state of mind he was in.  She said, twice you are forgiven, but
be sure that your head will be set on the hundredth post.
On the last day, he went with a heavy heart into the country, and
met the fox.  You know how to find all kinds of hiding-places,
said he, I let you live, now advise me where I shall hide myself
so that
the king's daughter shall not discover me.  That's a hard task,
answered the fox, looking very thoughtful.  At length he cried,
I have it, and went with him to a spring, dipped himself in it,
and came out as a stall-keeper in the market, and dealer in
animals.  The youth had to dip himself in the water also, and
was changed into a small sea-hare.  The merchant went into the
town, and showed the pretty little animal, and many persons
gathered together to see it.  At length the king's daughter
came likewise, and as she liked it very much, she bought it,
and gave the merchant a good deal of money for it.  Before he
gave it over to her, he said to it, when the king's daughter goes
to the window, creep quickly under the braids of her her hair.
And now the time arrived when she was to search for him.  She
went to one window after another in turn, from the first to the
eleventh, and did not see him.  When she did not see him from the
twelfth either, she was full of anxiety and anger, and shut it
down with such violence that the glass in every window shivered
into a thousand pieces, and the whole castle shook.
She went back and felt the sea-hare beneath the braids of her
hair.  Then she seized it, and threw it on the ground exclaiming,
away with you, get out of my sight.  It ran to the merchant, and
both of them hurried to the spring, wherein they plunged, and
received back their true forms.  The youth thanked the fox, and
said, the raven and the fish are idiots compared with you, you
know the right tune to play, there is no denying that.
The youth went straight to the palace.  The princess was already
expecting him, and abandoned herself to her fate.  The wedding
was solemnized, and now he was king, and lord of all the kingdom.
He never told her where he had concealed himself for the third
time, and who had helped him, so she believed that he had done
everything by his own skill, and she had a great respect for him,
for she thought to herself, he is able to do more than I.
One day an old man and his wife were sitting in front of a
miserable house resting a while from their work.  Suddenly
a splendid carriage with four black horses came driving up,
and a richly-dressed man descended from it.  The peasant stood
up, went to the great man, and asked what he wanted, and in what
way he could serve him.  The stranger stretched out his hand to
the old man, and said, I want nothing but to enjoy for once a
country dish, cook me some potatoes, in the way you always have
them, and then I will sit down at your table and eat them with
pleasure.  The peasant smiled and said, you are a count or a
prince, or perhaps even a duke, noble gentlemen often have such
fancies, but you shall have your wish.  The wife then went into
the kitchen and began to wash and rub the potatoes, and to make
them into balls, as they are eaten by the country-folks.  Whilst
she was busy with this work, the peasant said to the stranger,
come into my garden with me for a while, I have still something
to do there.  He had dug some holes in the garden, and now
wanted to plant trees in them.  Have you no children, asked the
stranger, who could help you with your work.  No, answered the
peasant, I had a son, it is true, but it is long since he went
out into the world.  He was a ne'er-do-well, clever and knowing,
but he would learn nothing and was full of bad tricks.  At last
he ran away from me, and since then I have heard nothing of him.
The old man took a young tree, put it in a hole, drove in a post
beside it, and when he had shovelled in some earth and had
trampled it firmly down, he tied the stem of the tree above,
below, and in the middle, fast to the post by a rope of straw.
But tell me,
said the stranger, why you don't tie that crooked knotted tree,
which is lying in the corner there, bent down almost to the ground,
to a post also that it may grow straight, as well as these.  The
old man smiled and said, sir, you speak according to your knowledge,
it is easy to see that you are not familiar with gardening.  That
tree there is old, and mis-shapen, no one can make it straight now.
Trees must be trained while they are young.  That is how it was
with your son, said the stranger, if you had trained him while
he was still young, he would not have run away.  Now he too must
have grown hard and mis-shapen.  Truly it is a long time since he
went away, replied the old man, he must have changed.  Would you
know him again if he were to come to you, asked the stranger.
Hardly by his face, replied the peasant, but he has a mark about
him, a birth-mark on his shoulder, that looks like a bean.  When
he had said that the stranger pulled off his coat, bared his
shoulder, and showed the peasant the bean.  Good God, cried the
old man, you are really my son, and love for his child stirred
in his heart.  But, he added, how can you be my son, you have
become a great lord and live in wealth and luxury.  How have you
contrived to do that.  Ah, father, answered the son, the young
tree was bound to no post and has grown crooked.  Now it is too
old, it will never be straight again.  How have I come by all this.
I have become a thief, but do not be alarmed, I am a master-thief.
For me there are neither locks nor bolts, whatsoever I desire is
mine.  Do not imagine that I steal like a common thief, I only
take some of the superfluity of the rich.  Poor people are safe,
I would rather give to them than take anything from them.  It is
the same with anything which I can have without trouble, cunning,
and dexterity - I never touch it.  Alas, my son, said the father,
it still does not please me, a thief is still a thief, I tell you
it will end badly.  He took him to his mother, and when she heard
that was her son, she wept for joy, but when he told her that he
had become a master-thief, two streams flowed down over her
face.  At length she said, even if he has become a thief, he is
still my son, and my eyes have beheld him once more.
They sat down to table, and once again he ate with his parents
the wretched food which he had not eaten for so long.  The father
said, if our lord, the count up there in the castle, learns who
you are, and what trade you follow, he will not take you in his
arms and cradle you in them as he did when he held you at the font,
but will cause you to swing from a halter.  Be easy, father, he
will do me no harm, for I understand my trade.  I will go to him
myself this very day.  When evening drew near, the master-thief
seated himself in his carriage, and drove to the castle.  The
count received him civilly, for he took him for a distinguished
man.  When, however, the stranger made himself known, the count
turned pale and was quite silent for some time.  At length he
said, you are my godson, and on that account mercy shall take
the place of justice, and I will deal leniently with you.  Since
you pride yourself on being a master-thief, I will put your art
to the proof, but if you do not stand the test, you must marry
the rope-maker's daughter, and the croaking of the raven must be
your music on the occasion.  Lord count, answered the
master-thief, think of three things, as difficult as you like,
and if I do not perform your tasks, do with me what you will.
The count reflected for some minutes, and then said, well, then,
in the first place, you shall steal the horse I keep for my own
riding, out of the stable.  In the next, you shall steal the
sheet from beneath the bodies of my wife and myself when we are
asleep, without our observing it, and the wedding-ring of my wife
as well.  Thirdly and lastly, you shall steal away out of the
church, the parson and clerk.  Mark what I am saying, for
your life depends on it.
The master-thief went to the nearest town, there he bought the
clothes of an old peasant woman, and put them on.  Then he stained
his face brown, and painted wrinkles on it as well, so that no one
could have recognized him.  Then he filled a small cask with old
hungary wine in which was mixed a powerful sleeping-drink.  He
put the cask in a basket, which he took on his back, and walked
with slow and tottering steps to the count's castle.  It was
already dark when he arrived.  He sat down on a stone in the
court-yard and began to cough, like an asthmatic old woman, and to
rub his hands as if he were cold.  In front of the door of the
stable some soldiers were
lying round a fire, one of them observed the woman, and called out
to her, come nearer, old mother, and warm yourself beside us.
After all, you have no bed for the night, and must take one where
you can find it.  The old woman tottered up to them, begged them
to lift the basket from her back, and sat down beside them at the
fire.  What have you got in your little cask, old hag, asked one.
A good mouthful of wine, she answered.  I live by trade, for
money and fair words I am quite ready to let you have a glass.
Let us have it here, then, said the soldier, and when he had
tasted one glass he said, when wine is good, I like another glass,
and had another poured out for himself, and the rest followed his
example.  Hallo, comrades, cried one of them to those who were in
the stable, here is an old girl who has wine that is as old as
herself, take a draught, it will warm your stomachs far better
than our fire.  The old woman carried her cask into the stable.
One of the soldiers had seated himself on the saddled riding-horse,
another held its bridle in his hand, a third had laid hold of
its tail.  She poured out as much as they wanted until the spring
ran dry.  It was not long before the bridle fell from the hand of
the one, and he fell down and began to snore, the other left hold
of the tail, lay down and snored still louder.  The one who was
sitting in the saddle, did remain sitting, but bent his head down
almost to the horse's neck, and slept and blew with his mouth like
the bellows of a forge.  The soldiers outside had already been
asleep for a long time, and were lying on the ground motionless,
as if dead.  When the master-thief saw that he had succeeded, he
gave the first a rope in his hand instead of the bridle, and the
other who had been holding the tail, a wisp of straw, but what was
he to do with the one who was sitting on the horse's back.  He
did not want to throw him down, for he might have awakened and
have uttered a cry.  He had a good idea, he unbuckled the girths
of the saddle, tied a couple of ropes which were hanging to a ring
on the wall fast to the saddle, and drew the sleeping rider up
into the air on it, then he twisted the rope round the posts, and
made it fast.  He soon unloosed the horse from the chain, but if
he had ridden over the stony pavement of the yard they would have
heard the noise in the castle.  So he wrapped the horse's hoofs in
old rags, led him carefully out, leapt upon him, and
galloped off.
When day broke, the master galloped to the castle on the stolen
horse.  The count had just got up, and was looking out of the
window.  Good morning, sir count, he cried to him, here is the
horse, which I have got safely out of the stable.  Just look, how
beautifully your soldiers are lying there sleeping, and if you will
but go into the stable, you will see how comfortable your
watchers have made it for themselves.  The count could not help
laughing.  Then he said, for once you have succeeded, but things
won't go so well the second time, and I warn you that if you come
before me as a thief, I will handle you as I would a thief.
When the countess went to bed that night, she closed her hand
with the wedding-ring tightly together, and the count said, all
the doors are locked and bolted, I will keep awake and wait for
the thief, but if he gets in by the window, I will shoot him.
The master-thief, however, went in the dark to the gallows, cut a
poor sinner who was hanging there down from the halter, and
carried him on his back to the castle.  Then he set a ladder up
to the bedroom, put the dead body on his shoulders, and began to
climb up.  When he had got so high that the head of the dead man
showed at the window, the count, who was watching in his bed,
fired a pistol at him, and immediately the master let the poor
sinner fall down, descended the ladder, and hid himself in one
corner.  The night was sufficiently lighted by the moon, for the
master to see distinctly how the count got out of the window on to
the ladder, came down, carried the dead body into the garden, and
began to dig a hole in which to lay it.  Now, thought the thief,
the favorable moment has come, stole nimbly out of his corner, and
climbed up the ladder straight into the countess's bedroom.  Dear
wife, he began in the count's voice, the thief is dead, but, after
all, he is my godson, and has been more of a scape-grace than a
villain.  I will not put him to open shame, besides, I am sorry
for the parents.  I will bury him myself before daybreak in the
garden, that the thing may not be known.  So give me the sheet,
I will wrap up the body in it, and not bury him like a dog.  The
countess gave him the sheet.  I tell you what, continued the
thief, I have a fit of magnanimity, give me the ring too, - the
unhappy man risked his life for it, so he may take it with him
into his grave.  She would not gainsay the count, and although
she did it unwillingly she drew the ring from her finger, and
gave it to him.  The thief made off with both these things, and
reached home safely before the count in the garden had finished
his work of burying.
What a long face the count did pull when the master came next
morning, and brought him the sheet and the ring.  Are you a
wizard, said he, who has fetched you out of the grave in which
I myself laid you, and brought you to life again.  You did not
bury me, said the thief, but the poor sinner on the gallows,
and he told him exactly how everything had happened, and the count
was forced to own to him that he was a clever, crafty thief.
But you have not reached the end yet, he added, you have still to
perform the third task, and if you do not succeed in that, all is
of no use.  The master smiled and returned no answer.
When night had fallen he went with a long sack on his back, a
bundle under his arms, and a lantern in his hand to the village
church.  In the sack he had some crabs, and in the bundle short
wax-candles.  He sat down in the churchyard, took out a crab, and
stuck a  wax-candle on his back.  Then he lighted the little light,
put the crab on the ground, and let it creep about.  He took a
second out of the sack, and treated it in the same way, and so on
until the last was out of the sack.  Hereupon he put on a long
black garment that looked like a monk's cowl, and stuck a gray
beard on his chin.  When at last he was quite unrecognizable, he
took the sack in which the crabs had been, went into the church,
and ascended the pulpit.  The clock in the tower was just striking
twelve, when the last stroke had sounded, he cried with a loud
and piercing voice, hearken, sinful men, the end of all things
has come.  The last day is at hand.  Hearken.  Hearken.
Whosoever wishes to go to heaven with me must creep into the sack.
I am peter, who opens and shuts the gate of heaven.  Behold how
the dead outside there in the chuchyard are wandering about
collecting their bones.  Come, come, and creep into the sack, the
world is about to be destroyed.  The cry echoed through the whole
village.  The parson and clerk who lived nearest to the church,
heard it first, and when they saw the lights which were moving
about the churchyard, they observed that something unusual was
going on, and went into the church.  They listened to the sermon
for a while, and then the clerk nudged the parson and said, it
would not be amiss if we were to use the opportunity together, and
before the dawning of the last day, find an easy way of getting
to heaven.  To tell the truth, answered the parson, that is what I
myself have been thinking, so if you are inclined, we will set out
on our way.  Yes, answered the clerk, but you, the pastor, have
the precedence, I will follow.  So the parson went first, and
ascended the pulpit where the master opened his
sack.  The parson crept in first, and then the clerk.  The master
immediately tied up the sack tightly, seized it by the middle, and
dragged it down the pulpit-steps, and whenever the heads of the
two fools bumped against the steps, he cried, we are going over
the mountains.  Then he drew them through the village in the same
way, and when they were passing through puddles, he cried, now
we are going through wet clouds.  And when at last he was dragging
them up the steps of the castle, he cried, now we are on the
steps of heaven, and will soon be in the outer court.  When he had
got to the top, he pushed the sack into the pigeon-house, and when
the pigeons fluttered about, he said, hark how glad the angels are,
and how they are flapping their wings.  Then he bolted the door
upon them, and went away.
Next morning he went to the count, and told him that he had
performed the third task also, and had carried the parson and clerk
out of the church.  Where have you left them, asked the Lord.
They are lying upstairs in a sack in the pigeon-house, and
imagine that they are in heaven.  The count went up himself, and
convinced himself that the master had told the truth.  When he had
delivered the parson and clerk from their captivity, he said, you
are an arch-thief, and have won your wager.  For once you escape
with a whole skin, but see that you leave my land, for if ever you
set foot on it again, you may count on your elevation to the
gallows.  The arch-thief took leave of his parents, once more
went forth into the wide world, and no one has ever heard of
him since.
A young drummer went out quite alone one evening into the country,
and came to a lake on the shore of which he perceived lying there
three pieces of white linen.  What fine linen, said he, and put one
piece in his pocket.  He returned home, thought no more of what he
had found, and went to bed.  Just as he was going to sleep, it
seemed to him as if someone was calling his name.  He listened,
and was aware of a soft voice which cried to him, drummer, drummer,
wake up.  As it was a dark night he could see no one, but it
appeared to him that a figure was hovering about his bed.  What
do you want, he asked.  Give me back my shift, answered the voice,
that you took away from me last evening by the lake.  You shall have
it back again, said the drummer, if you will tell me who you are.
Ah, replied the voice, I am the daughter of a mighty king.  But I
have fallen into the power of a witch, and am shut up on the
glass-mountain.  I have to bathe in the lake every day with my
two sisters, but I cannot fly back again without my shift.  My
sisters have gone away, but I have been forced to stay behind.  I
entreat you to give me my shift back.  Don't worry, poor child,
said the drummer.  I will willingly give it back to you.  He took
it out of his pocket, and reached it to her in the dark.  She
snatched it in haste, and wanted to go away with it.  Stop a
moment, perhaps I can help you.  You can only help me by ascending
the glass-mountain, and indeed if you were quite close to it you
could not ascend it.  When I want to do a thing I always can do
it, said the drummer.  I am sorry for you, and have no fear of
anything.  But I do not know the way which leads to the
glass-mountain.  The road goes through the great
forest, in which the man-eaters live, she answered, and more than
that, I dare not tell you.  And then he heard her wings as she flew
away.
By daybreak the drummer arose, buckled on his drums, and went
without fear straight into the forest.  After he had walked for
a while without seeing any giants, he thought to himself, I
must waken up the sluggards, and he hung his drum before him,
and beat such a roll that the birds flew out of the trees with
loud cries.  It was not long before a giant who had been lying
sleeping among the grass, rose up, and was as tall as a fir-tree.
Wretch, cried he, what are you drumming here for, and wakening
me out of my best sleep.  I am drumming, he replied, because
I want to show the way to many thousands who are following me.
What do they want in my forest, demanded the giant.  They want
to put an end to you, and cleanse the forest of such a monster
as you.  Oho.  Said the giant, I will trample you all to death
like so many ants.  Do you think you can do anything against us,
said the drummer, if you stoop to take hold of one, he will jump
away and hide himself.  But when you are lying down and sleeping,
they will come forth from every thicket, and creep up to you.
Every one of them has a hammer of steel in his belt, and with
that they will beat in your skull.  The giant grew angry and
thought, if I meddle with the crafty folk, it might turn out
badly for me.  I can strangle wolves and bears, but I cannot
protect myself from these earth-worms.  Listen, little fellow,
said he, go back again, and I will promise you that for the
future I will leave you and your comrades in peace, and if there
is anything else you wish for, tell me, for I am quite willing
to do something to please you.  You have long legs, said
the drummer, and can run quicker than I.  Carry me to the
glass-mountain, and I will give my followers a signal to go
back, and they shall leave you in peace this time.  Come here,
worm, said the giant.  Seat yourself on my shoulder, I will carry
you where you wish to be.  The giant lifted him up, and the
drummer began to beat his drum up aloft to his heart's delight.
The giant thought, that is the signal for the other people to
turn back.
After a while, a second giant was standing in the road, who took
the drummer from the first, and stuck him in his button-hole.
The drummer laid hold of the button, which was as large as a
dish, held on by it, and looked merrily around.  Then they came
to a third giant, who took him out of the button-hole, and set
him on the rim of his hat.  Up there the drummer walked backwards
and forwards, and looked over the trees, and when he perceived
a mountain in the blue distance, he thought, that must be the
glass-mountain, and so it was.  The giant only made two more
steps, and they reached the foot of the mountain, where the
giant put him down.  The drummer demanded to be put on the
summit of the glass-mountain, but the giant shook his head,
growled something in his beard, and went back into the forest.
And now the poor drummer was standing before the mountain, which
was as high as if three mountains were piled on each other, and
at the same time as smooth as a looking-glass, and did not know
how to get up it.  He began to climb, but that was useless, for
he always slipped back again.  If one was a bird now, thought
he.  But what was the good of wishing, no wings grew for him.
Whilst he was standing thus, not knowing what to do, he saw, not
far from him, two men who were struggling fiercely together.  He
went up to them and saw that they were disputing about a saddle
which was lying on the ground before them, and which both of them
wanted to have.  What fools you are, said he, to quarrel about
a saddle, when you have not a horse for it.  The saddle is
worth fighting about, answered one of the men.  Whosoever
sits on it, and wishes himself in any place, even if it should
be the very end of the earth, gets there the instant he has uttered
the wish.  The saddle belongs to us in common.  It is my turn
to ride on it, but that other man will not let me do it.  I
will soon decide the quarrel, said the drummer, and he went
to a short distance and stuck a white rod in the ground.  Then
he came back and said, now run to the goal, and whoever gets
there first, shall ride first.  Both set out at a trot, but
hardly had they gone a couple of steps before the drummer swung
himself on the saddle, wished himself on the glass-mountain
and before any one could turn round, he was there.  On the
top of the mountain was a plain.  There stood an old stone house,
and in front of the house lay a great fish-pond, but behind it was
a dark forest.  He saw neither men nor animals, everything was
quiet.  Only the wind rustled amongst the trees, and the clouds
moved by quite close above his head.  He went to the door and
knocked.  When he had knocked for the third time, an old woman
with a brown face and red eyes opened the door.  She had
spectacles on her long nose, and looked sharply at him.  Then
she asked what he wanted.  Entrance, food, and a bed for the
night, replied the drummer.  That you shall have, said the old
woman, if you will perform three services in return.  Why not,
he answered, I am not afraid of any kind of work, however, hard
it may be.  The old woman let him go in, and gave him some food
and a good bed at night.  The next morning when he had slept
his fill, she took a thimble from her wrinkled finger, reached
it to the drummer, and said, go to work now, and empty out the
pond with this thimble.  But you must have done it before night,
and must have sought out all the fishes which are in the water
and laid them side by side, according to their kind and size.
That is strange work, said the drummer, but he went to the pond,
and began to empty it.  He baled the whole morning.  But what
can anyone do to a great lake with a thimble, even if he were
to bale for a thousand years.
When it was noon, he thought, it is all useless, and whether I
work or not it will come to the same thing.  So he gave it up
and sat down.  Then came a maiden out of the house who set a
little basket with food before him, and said, what ails you,
that you sit so sadly here.  He looked at her, and saw that
she was wondrously beautiful.  Ah, said he, I cannot finish
the first piece of work, how will it be with the others.  I
came forth to seek a king's daughter who is said to dwell here,
but I have not found her, and I will go farther.  Stay here,
said the maiden, I will help you out of your difficulty.  You
are tired, lay your head in my lap, and sleep.  When you awake
again, your work will be done.  The drummer did not
need to be told that twice.  As soon as his eyes were shut,
she turned a wishing-ring and said, rise, water.  Fishes, come out.
Instantly the water rose on high like a white mist, and moved
away with the other clouds, and the fishes sprang on the shore
and laid themselves side by side each according to his size and
kind.  When the drummer awoke, he saw with amazement that all
was done.  But the maiden said, one of the fish is not lying
with those of its own kind, but quite alone.  When the old
woman comes to-night and sees that all she demanded has been
done, she will ask you, what is this fish lying alone for.
Then throw the fish in her face, and say, this one shall be
for you, old witch.  In the evening the witch came, and when
she had put this question, he threw the fish in her face.  She
behaved as if she did not notice it, and said nothing, but
looked at him with malicious eyes.  Next morning she said,
yesterday it was too easy for you, I must give you harder work.
To-day you must hew down the whole of the forest, split the wood
into logs, and pile them up, and everything must be finished
by the evening.  She gave him an axe, a mallet, and two wedges.
But the axe was made of lead, and the mallet and wedges were of
tin.  When he began to cut, the edge of the axe was blunted,
and the mallet and wedges were beaten out of shape.  He did
not know how to manage, but at mid-day the maiden came once more
with his dinner and comforted him.  Lay your head on my lap,
said she, and sleep.  When you awake, your work will be done.
She turned her wishing-ring, and in an instant the whole forest
fell down with a crash, the wood split, and arranged itself
in heaps, and it seemed just as if unseen giants were finishing
the work.  When he awoke, the maiden said, do you see that the
wood is piled up and arranged, one bough alone remains.  But
when the old woman comes this evening and asks you about that
bough, give her a blow with it, and say, that is for you,
you witch.
The old woman came, there you see how easy the work was,
said she.  But for whom have you left that bough.  For you,
you witch, he replied, and gave her a blow with it.  But she
pretended not to feel it, laughed scornfully, and said, early
to-morrow morning you shall arrange all the wood in one heap,
set fire to it, and burn it.  He rose at break of day, and began
to pick up the wood, but how can a single man get a whole forest
together.  The work made no progress.  The maiden, however,
did not desert him in his need.  She brought him his food at
noon, and when he had eaten, he laid his head on her lap, and
went to sleep.  When he awoke, the entire pile of wood was
burning in one enormous flame, which stretched its tongues
out into the sky.  Listen to me, said the maiden, when the witch
comes, she will give you all kinds of orders.  Do whatever she
asks you without fear, and then she will not be able to get the
better of you, but if you are afraid, the fire will lay hold
of you, and consume you.  At last when you have done everything,
seize her with both your hands, and throw her into the midst
of the fire.  The maiden departed, and the old woman came
sneaking up to him.  Oh, I am cold, said she, but that is a fire
that burns.  It warms my old bones, and does me good.  But I
see a log lying there which won't burn, bring it out for me.
When you have done that, you are free, and may go where you
like.  Now, jump in.
The drummer did not reflect long.  He sprang into the midst of
the flames, but they did not hurt him, and could not even singe
a hair of his head.  He carried the log out, and laid it
down.  Hardly, however, had the wood touched the earth than it was
transformed, and the beautiful maiden who had helped him in his
need stood before him, and by the silken and shining golden
garments which she wore, he knew right well that she was the
king's daughter.  But the old woman laughed venomously, and said,
you think you have her safe, but you have not got her yet.  Just
as she was about to fall on the maiden and take her away, the
youth seized the old woman with both his hands, raised her up
on high, and threw her into the jaws of the fire, which closed
over her as if it were delighted that an old witch was to be
burnt.
Then the king's daughter looked at the drummer, and when she saw
that he was a handsome youth and remembered how he had risked
his life to deliver her, she gave him her hand, and said, you
have ventured everything for my sake, but I also will do everything
for yours.  Promise to be true to me, and you shall be my
husband.  We shall not want for riches, we shall have enough
with what the witch has gathered together here.  She led him into
the house, where there were chests and coffers crammed with the
old woman's treasures.  The maiden left the gold and silver where
it was, and took only the precious stones.  She would not stay
any longer on the glass-mountain, so the drummer said to her,
seat yourself by me on my saddle, and then we will fly down like
birds.  I do not like the old saddle, said she, I need only
turn my wishing-ring and we shall be at home.  Very well, then,
answered the drummer, then wish us in front of the town-gate.  In
the twinkling of an eye they were there, but the drummer said,
I will just go to my parents and tell them the news.  Wait for
me outside here, I shall soon be back.  Ah, said the king's
daughter, I beg you to be careful.  On your arrival do not kiss
your parents on the right cheek, or else you will forget
everything, and I shall stay behind here outside, alone and
deserted.  How can I forget you, said he, and promised her to
come back very soon, and gave his hand upon it.  When he went into
his father's house, he had changed so much that no one knew who
he was, for the three days which he had passed on the glass-mountain
had been three years.  Then he made himself known, and his parents
fell on his neck with joy, and his heart was so moved that
he forgot what the maiden had said and kissed them on both
cheeks.  But when he had given them the kiss on the right cheek,
every thought of the king's daughter vanished from him.  He
emptied out his pockets, and laid handfuls of the largest jewels
on the table.  The parents had not the least idea what to do with
the riches.  Then the father built a magnificent castle all
surrounded by gardens, woods, and meadows as if a prince were
going to live in it, and when it was ready, the mother said, I
have found a maiden for you and the wedding shall be in three days.
The son was content to do as his parents desired.
The poor king's daughter had stood for a long time outside the
town waiting for the return of the young man.  When evening came,
she said, he must certainly have kissed his parents on the right
cheek, and has forgotten me.  Her heart was full of sorrow, she
wished herself into a solitary little hut in a forest, and would
not return to her father's court.  Every evening she went into
the town and passed the young man's house.  He often saw her,
but he no longer knew her.  At length she heard the people
saying, the wedding will take place to-morrow.  Then she said,
I will try if I can win back his heart.
On the first day of the wedding ceremonies, she turned her
wishing-ring, and said, a dress as bright as the sun.  Instantly
the dress lay before her, and it was as bright as if it had been
woven of real sunbeams.  When all the guests were assembled, she
entered the hall.  Every one was amazed at the beautiful dress,
and the bride most of all, and as pretty dresses were the
things she had most delight in, she went to the stranger and asked
if she would sell it to her.  Not for money, she answered, but
if I may pass the first night outside the door of the room where
your betrothed sleeps, I will give it up to you.  The bride
could not overcome her desire and consented, but she mixed a
sleeping-draught with the wine her betrothed took at night,
which made him fall into a deep sleep.  When all had be-
           - line missing in book copy -
of the bedroom, opened it just a little, and cried,
          drummer, drummer, I pray you hear.
          Have you forgotten you held me dear.
          That on the glass-mountain we sat hour by hour.
          That I rescued your life from the witch's power.
          Did you not plight your troth to me.
          Drummer, drummer, hearken to me.
But it was all in vain, for the drummer did not awake, and when
morning dawned, the king's daughter was forced to go back again
as she came.  On the second evening she turned her wishing-ring
and said, a dress as silvery as the moon.  When she appeared at
the feast in the dress which was as soft as moonbeams, it again
excited the desire of the bride, and the king's daughter gave it
to her
for permission to pass the second night also, outside the door
of the bedroom.  When in the stillness of the night, she cried,
          drummer, drummer, I pray you hear.
          Have you forgotten you held me dear.
          That on the glass-mountain we sat hour by hour.
          That I rescued your life from the witch's power.
          Did you not plight your troth to me.
          Drummer, drummer, hearken to me.
But the drummer, who was stupefied with the sleeping-draught,
could not be aroused.  Sadly next morning she went back to
her hut in the forest.  But the people in the house had heard
the lamentation of the unknown maiden, and told the bridegroom
about it.  They told him also that it was impossible that he could
hear anything of it, because the maiden he was going to marry
had poured a sleeping-draught into his wine.
On the third evening, the king's daughter turned her wishing-ring,
and said, a dress glittering like the stars.  When she showed
herself therein at the feast, the bride was quite beside herself
with the splendor of the dress, which far surpassed the others,
and she said, I must, and will have it.  The maiden gave it as
she had given the others for permission to spend the night
outside the bridegroom's door.  The bridegroom, however, did not
drink the wine which was handed to him before he went to bed,
but poured it behind the bed, and when everything was quiet, he
heard a sweet voice which called to him,
          drummer, drummer, I pray you hear.
          Have you forgotten you held me dear.
          That on the glass-mountain we sat hour by hour.
          That I rescued your life from the witch's power.
          Did you not plight your troth to me.
          Drummer, drummer, hearken to me.
Suddenly his memory returned to him.  Ah, cried he, how can I
have acted so unfaithfully.  But the kiss which in the joy of my
heart I gave my parents, on the right cheek, that is to blame
for it all.  That is what stupefied me.  He sprang up, took the
king's daughter by the hand, and led her to his parents, bed.
This is my true bride, said he.  If I marry the other, I shall
do a great wrong.  The parents, when they heard how everything
had happened, gave their consent.  Then the lights in the
hall were lighted again, drums and trumpets were brought,
friends and relations were invited to come, and the real wedding
was solemnized with great rejoicing.  The first bride received
the beautiful dresses as a compensation, and declared herself
satisfied.
In former times, when God himself still walked the earth, the
fruitfulness of the soil was much greater than it is now.  Then
the ears of corn did not bear fifty or sixty, but four or five
hundred-fold.  Then the corn grew from the bottom to the very top
of the stalk, and according to the length of the stalk was the
length of the ear.  Men however are so made, that when they are
too well off they no longer value the blessings which come from
God, but grow indifferent and careless.  One day a woman was
passing by a corn-field when her little child, who was running
beside her, fell into a puddle, and dirtied her frock.  On this
the mother tore up a handful of the beautiful ears of corn, and
cleaned the frock with them.
When the Lord, who just then came by, saw that, he was angry,
and said, henceforth shall the stalks of corn bear no more ears,
men are no longer worthy of heavenly gifts.  The by-standers who
heard this, were terrified, and fell on their knees and prayed
that he would still leave something on the stalks, even if the
people were undeserving of it, for the sake of the innocent
chickens which would otherwise have to starve.  The Lord, who
foresaw their suffering, had pity on them, and granted the
request.  So the ears were left as they now grow.
There was once upon a time a king who had a daughter,
and he caused a glass mountain to be made, and said that
whosoever could cross to the other side of it without falling
should have his daughter to wife.  Then there was one who loved
the king's daughter, and he asked the king if he might have her.
Yes, said the king, if you can cross the mountain without falling,
you shall have her.  And the princess said she would go over it
with him, and would hold him if he were about to fall.  So they
set out together to go over it, and when they were half way up the
princess slipped and fell, and the glass mountain opened and shut
her up inside it, and her betrothed could not see where she had
gone, for the mountain closed immediately.  Then he wept and
lamented much, and the king was miserable too, and ordered the
mountain to be broken open where she had been lost, and thought
he would
be able to get her out again, but they could not find the place
into which she had fallen.
Meanwhile the king's daughter had fallen quite deep down into
the earth into a great cave.  An old fellow with a very long gray
beard came to meet her, and told her that if she would be his
servant and do everything he bade her, she might live, if not
he would kill her.  So she did all he bade her.  In the mornings
he took his ladder out of his pocket, and set it up against the
mountain and climbed to the top by its help, and then he drew the
ladder after him.  The princess had to cook his dinner, make his
bed, and do all his work, and when he came home again he always
brought with him a heap of gold and silver.  When she had lived
with him for many years, and had grown quite old, he called her
mother mansrot, and she had to call him old rinkrank.  Then once
when he was out, and she had made his bed and washed his dishes,
she shut the doors and windows all fast, and there was one little
window through which the light shone in, and this she left open.
When old rinkrank came home, he knocked at his door, and cried,
mother mansrot, open the door for me.  No, said she, old rinkrank,
I will not open the door for you.  Then he said,
     here stand I, poor rinkrank,
     on my seventeen long shanks,
     on my weary, worn-out foot,
     wash my dishes, mother mansrot.
I have washed your dishes already, said she.  Then again he said,
     here stand I, poor rinkrank,
     on my seventeen long shanks,
     on my weary, worn-out foot,
     make my bed, mother mansrot.
I have made your bed already, said she.  Then again he said,
     here stand I, poor rinkrank,
     on my seventeen long shanks,
     on my weary, worn-out foot,
     open the door, mother mansrot.
Then he ran all round his house, and saw that the little window
was open, and thought, I will look in and see what she can be about,
and why she will not open the door for me.  He tried to peep in,
but could not get his head through because of his long beard.
So he first put his beard through the open window, but just as he
had got it through, mother mansrot came by and pulled the window
down with a cord which she had tied to it, and his beard was shut
fast in it.  Then he began to cry most piteously, for it hurt
him very much, and to entreat her to release him again.  But she
said not until he gave her the ladder with which he ascended the
mountain.  Then, whether he would or not, he had to tell her where
the ladder was.  And she fastened a very long ribbon to the
window, and then she set up the ladder, and ascended the
mountain, and when she was at the top of it she opened the
window.  She went to her father, and told him all that had
happened to her.  The king rejoiced greatly, and her betrothed
was still there, and they went and dug up the mountain, and found
old rinkrank inside it with all his gold and silver.  Then the
king had old rinkrank put to death, and took all his gold and
silver.  The princess married her betrothed, and lived right
happily in great magnificence and joy.
There was once an enchantress, who had three sons who loved each
other as brothers, but the old woman did not trust them, and
thought they wanted to steal her power from her.  So she changed
the eldest into an eagle, which was forced to dwell in the rocky
mountains, and was often seen flying in great circles in the sky.
The second, she changed into a whale, which lived in the deep sea,
and all that was seen of it was that it sometimes spouted up a
great jet of water in the air.  Each of them bore his
human form for only two hours daily.  The third son, who was afraid
she might change him into a raging wild beast - a bear perhaps, or
a wolf, went secretly away.  He had heard that a king's daughter
who was bewitched, was imprisoned in the castle of the golden sun,
and was waiting to be set free.  Those, however, who tried to free
her risked their lives.  Three-and-twenty youths had already died
a miserable death, and now only one other might make the attempt,
after which no more must come.  And as his heart was without fear,
he made up his mind to seek out the castle of the golden sun.  He
had already traveled about for a long time without being able to
find it, when he came by chance into a great forest, and did not
know the way out of it.  All at once he saw in the distance two
giants, who made a sign to him with their hands, and when he came
to them they said, we are quarreling about a cap, and which of us
it is to belong to, and as we are equally strong, neither of us
can get the better of the other.  The small men are cleverer than
we are, so we will leave the decision to you.  How can you
dispute about an old cap, said the youth.  You do not know what
properties it has.  It is a wishing-cap, whosoever puts it on, can
wish himself away wherever he likes, and in an instant he will be
there.  Give me the cap, said the youth, I will go a short
distance off, and when I call you, you must run a race, and the
cap shall belong to the one who gets first to me.  He put it on
and went away, and thought of the king's daughter, forgot the
giants, and walked continually onward.  At length he sighed from
the very bottom of his heart, and cried, ah, if I were but at the
castle of the golden sun.  And hardly had the words passed his
lips than he was standing on a high mountain before the
gate of the castle.
He entered and went through all the rooms, until in the last he
found the king's daughter.  But how shocked he was when he saw
her.  She had an ashen-gray face full of wrinkles, bleary eyes,
and red hair.  Are you the king's daughter, whose beauty the whole
world praises, cried he.  Ah, she answered, this is not my form,
human eyes can only see me in this state of ugliness, but that you
may know what I am like, look in the mirror - it does not let
itself be misled - it will show you my image as it is in truth.
She gave him the mirror in his hand, and he saw therein the
likeness of the most beautiful maiden on earth, and saw, too, how
the tears were rolling down her cheeks with grief.  Then said he,
how can you be set free.  I fear no danger.  She said, he who gets
the crystal ball, and holds it before the enchanter, will destroy
his power with it, and I shall resume my true shape.  Ah, she
added, so many have already gone to meet death for this, and you
are so young, I grieve that you should encounter such great
danger.  Nothing can keep me from doing it, said he, but tell me
what I must do.  You shall know everything, said the king's
daughter, when you descend the mountain on which the castle stands,
a wild bull will stand below by a spring, and you must fight with
it, and if you have the luck to kill it, a fiery bird will spring
out of it, which bears in its body a red-hot egg, and in the egg
the crystal ball lies as its yolk.  The bird, however, will not
let the egg fall until forced to do so, and if it falls on the
ground, it will flame up and burn everything that is near, and
even the egg itself will melt, and with it the crystal ball,
and then your trouble will have been in vain.
The youth went down to the spring, where the bull snorted and
bellowed at him.  After a long struggle he plunged his sword in the
animal's body, and it fell down.  Instantly a fiery bird arose
from it and was about to fly away, but the young man's brother,
the eagle, who was passing between the clouds, swooped down,
hunted it away to the sea, and struck it with his beak until, in
its extremity, it let the egg fall.  The egg, however, did not
fall into the sea, but on a fisherman's hut which stood on the
shore and the hut began at once to smoke and was about to break
out in flames.  Then arose in the sea waves as high as a house,
which streamed over the hut, and subdued the fire.  The other
brother, the whale, had come swimming to them, and had driven the
water up on high.  When the fire was extinguished, the youth
sought for the egg and happily found it, it was not yet melted,
but the shell was broken by being so suddenly cooled with the
water, and he could take out the crystal ball unhurt.
When the youth went to the enchanter and held it before him,
the latter said, my power is destroyed, and from this time forth
you are the king of the castle of the golden sun.  With this you
can likewise give back to your brothers their human form.
Then the youth hastened to the king's daughter, and when he
entered the room, she was standing there in the full splendor
of her beauty, and joyfully they exchanged rings with each other.
There was once a king who had a son who asked in marriage the
daughter of a mighty king, she was called maid maleen, and was
very beautiful.  As her father wished to give her to another,
the prince was rejected, but as they both loved each other with
all their hearts, they would not give each other up, and
maid maleen said to her father, I can and will take no other for
my husband.  Then the king flew into a passion, and ordered a
dark tower to be built, into which no ray of sunlight or moonlight
should enter.  When it was finished, he said, therein shall you be
imprisoned for seven years, and then I will come and see if your
perverse spirit is broken.  Meat and drink for the seven years
were carried into the tower, and then she and her maid-in-waiting
were led into it and walled up, and thus cut off from the sky and
from the earth.  There they sat in the darkness, and knew not
when day or night began.  The king's son often went round and
round the tower, and called their names, but no sound from
without pierced through the thick walls.  What else could they do
but lament and complain.
Meanwhile the time passed, and by the decline of food and drink
they knew that the seven years were coming to an end.  They
thought the moment of their deliverance was come, but no stroke
of the hammer was heard, no stone fell out of the wall, and it
seemed to maid maleen that her father had forgotten her.  As
they had food only for a short time longer, and saw a miserable
death awaiting them, maid maleen said, we must try our last
chance, and see if we can break through the wall.  She took the
bread-knife, and picked and bored at the mortar of a stone, and
when she was tired, the waiting-maid took her turn.  With great
labor they succeeded in getting out one stone, and then a second,
and a third, and when three days were over the first ray of light
fell on their darkness, and at last the opening was so large that
they could look out.  The sky was blue, and a fresh breeze
played on their faces, but how melancholy everything looked all
around.  Her father's castle lay in ruins, the town and the
villages were, so far as could be seen, destroyed by fire, the
fields far and wide laid to waste, and no human being was visible.
When the opening in the wall was large enough for them to slip
through, the waiting-maid sprang down first, and then maid maleen
followed.  But where were they to go.  The enemy had ravaged the
whole kingdom, driven away the king, and slain all the inhabitants.
They wandered forth to seek another
country, but nowhere did they find a shelter, or a human being to
give them a mouthful of bread, and their need was so great that
they were forced to appease their hunger with nettles.  When,
after long journeying, they came into another country, they tried
to get work everywhere, but wherever they knocked they were turned
away, and no one would have pity on them.  At last they arrived in
a large city and went to the royal palace.  There also they were
ordered to go away, but at last the cook said that they might stay
in the kitchen and be scullions.
The son of the king in whose kingdom they were, however, was the
very man who had been betrothed to maid maleen.  His father had
chosen another bride for him, whose face was as ugly as her heart
was wicked.  The wedding was fixed, and the maiden had already
arrived, but because of her great ugliness she shut herself in
her room, and allowed no one to see her, and maid maleen had to
take her her meals from the kitchen.  When the day came for the
bride and the bridegroom to go to church, she was ashamed of her
ugliness, and afraid that if she showed herself in the streets,
she would be mocked and laughed at by the people.  Then said she
to maid maleen, a great piece of luck has befallen you.  I have
sprained my foot, and cannot well walk through the streets, you
shall put on wedding-clothes and take my place, a greater honor
than that you cannot have.  Maid maleen, however, refused it, and
said, I wish for no honor which is not suitable for me.  It was in
vain, too, that the bride offered her gold.  At last she said
angrily, if you do not obey me, it shall cost you your life.  I
have but to speak the word, and your head will lie at your feet.
Then she was forced to obey, and put on the bride's magnificent
clothes and all her jewels.  When she entered the royal hall, every
one was amazed at her great beauty, and the king said to his son,
this is the bride whom I have chosen for you, and whom you must
lead to church.  The bridegroom was astonished, and thought, she
is like my maid maleen, and I should believe that it was she
herself, but she has long been shut up in the tower, or dead.
He took her by the hand and led her to church.  On the way was a
nettle-plant, and she said,
     oh, nettle-plant,
     little nettle-plant,
     what dost thou here alone.
     I have known the time
     when I ate thee unboiled
     when I ate thee unroasted.
What are you saying, asked the king's son.  Nothing, she replied,
I was only thinking of maid maleen.  He was surprised that she knew
about her, but kept silence.  When they came to the foot-plank
into the chuchyard, she said,
     foot-bridge, do not break,
     I am not the true bride.
What are you saying there, asked the the king's son.  Nothing, she
replied, I was only thinking of maid maleen.  Do you know maid
maleen.  No, she answered, how should I know her, I have only
heard of her.  When they came to the church-door, she said once
more,
     church-door, break not,
     I am not the true bride.
What are you saying there asked he.  Ah, she answered, I was only
thinking of maid maleen.  Then he took out a precious chain, put it
round her neck, and fastened the clasp.  Thereupon they entered the
church, and the priest joined their hands together before the
altar, and married them.  He led her home, but she did not speak
a single word the whole way.  When they got back to the royal
palace, she hurried into the bride's chamber, put off the
magnificent clothes and the jewels, dressed herself in her gray
gown, and kept nothing but the jewel on her neck, which she had
received from the bridegroom.
When the night came, and the bride was to be led into the prince's
apartment, she let her veil fall over her face, that he might not
observe the deception.  As soon as everyone had gone away, he said
to her,  what did you say to the nettle-plant which was growing
by the wayside.
To which nettle-plant, asked she, I don't talk to nettle-plants.
If you did not do it, then you are not the true bride, said he.
So she bethought herself, and said,
     I must go out unto my maid
     who keeps my thoughts for me.
She went out and sought maid maleen.  Girl, what have you been
saying to the nettle.  I said nothing but,
     oh, nettle-plant,
     little nettle-plant,
     what dost thou here alone.
     I have known the time
     when I ate thee unboiled,
     when I ate thee unroasted.
The bride ran back into the chamber, and said, I know now
what I said to the nettle, and she repeated the words which she had
just heard.  But what did you say to the foot-bridge when we went
over it asked the king's son.  To the foot-bridge, she answered.
I don't talk to foot-bridges.  Then you are not the true bride.
She again said,
     I must go out unto my maid,
     who keeps my thoughts for me.
And ran out and scolded maid maleen, girl, what did you say to the
foot-bridge.
I said nothing but,
     foot-bridge, do not break,
     I am not the true bride.
That costs you your life, cried the bride, but she hurried into
the room and said, I know now what I said to the foot-bridge,
and she repeated the words.  But what did you say to the
church-door.  To the church-door, she replied, I don't talk to
church-doors.  Then you are not the true bride.
She went out and scolded maid maleen, and said, girl, what did you
say to the church-door.  I said nothing but,
     church-door, break not,
     I am not the true bride.
That will break your neck for you, cried the bride, and flew
into a terrible passion, but she hastened back into the room, and
said, I know now what I said to the church-door, and she
repeated the words.  But where have you the jewel which I gave you
at the church-door.  What jewel, she answered, you did not give
me any jewel.  I myself put it round your neck, and I myself
fastened it, if you do not know that, you are not the true bride.
He drew the veil from her face, and when he saw her immeasurable
ugliness, he sprang back terrified, and said, how do you come here.
Who are you.  I am your betrothed bride, but because I feared lest
the people should mock me when they saw me out of doors, I
commanded the scullery-maid to dress herself in my clothes, and to
go to church instead of me.  Where is the girl, said he
I want to see her, go and bring her here.  She went out
and told the servants that the scullery-maid was an impostor, and
that they must take her out into the court-yard and strike off her
head.  The servants laid hold of maid maleen and wanted to drag her
out, but she screamed so loudly for help, that the king's son
heard her voice, hurried out of his chamber and ordered them to
set the maiden free instantly.  Lights were brought, and then he
saw on her neck the gold chain which he had given her at the
church-door.  You are the true bride, said he, who went with me
to church, come with me now to my room.  When they were both alone,
he said, on the way to the church you did name maid maleen, who
was my betrothed bride.  If I could believe it possible, I should
think she was standing before me - you are like her in every
respect.  She answered, I am maid maleen, who for your sake was
imprisoned seven years in the darkness, who suffered hunger and
thirst, and has lived so long in want and poverty.  Today,
however, the sun is shining on me once more.  I was married to
you in the church, and I am your lawful wife.  Then they kissed
each other, and were happy all the days of their lives.  The
false bride was rewarded for what she had done by having her
head cut off.
The tower in which maid maleen had been imprisoned remained
standing for a long time, and when the children passed by it
they sang,
     king, klang, gloria.
     Who sits within this tower.
     A king's daughter, she sits within,
     a sight of her I cannot win,
     the wall it will not break,
     the stone cannot be pierced.
     Little Hans, with your coat so gay,
     follow me, follow me, fast as you may.
There was once on a time a mother who had three daughters,
the eldest of whom was rude and wicked, the second much better,
although she had her faults, but the youngest was a pious, good
child.  The mother, however, was so strange, that it was just
the eldest daughter whom she most loved, and she could not bear
the youngest.  On this account, she often sent the poor girl
out into the great forest in order to get rid of her, for she
thought she would lose herself and never come back again.  But
the guardian-angel which every good child has, did not forsake
her, but always brought her into the right path again.  Once,
however, the guardian-angel behaved as if he were not there,
and the child could not find her way out of the forest again.
She walked on constantly until evening came, and then she saw
a tiny light burning in the distance, ran up to it at once,
and came to a little hut.  She knocked, the door opened, and
she came to a second door, where she knocked again.  An old man,
who had a snow-white beard and looked venerable, opened it
for her.  And he was no other than St. Joseph.  He said quite
kindly, come, dear child, seat yourself on my little chair by
the fire, and warm yourself.  I will fetch you clear water if
you are thirsty.  But here in the forest, I have nothing for
you to eat but a couple of little roots, which you must first
scrape and boil.
St. Joseph gave her the roots.  The girl scraped them clean, then
she brought a piece of pancake and the bread that her mother
had given her to take with her, mixed all together in a pan, and
cooked herself a thick soup.  When it was ready, St. Joseph said,
I am so hungry, give me some of your food.  The child was quite
willing, and gave him more than she kept for herself, but God's
blessing
was with her, so that she was satisfied.  When they had eaten,
St. Joseph said, now we will go to bed.  I have, however, only
one bed, lay your self in it.  I will lie on the ground on the
straw.  No, answered she, stay in your own bed, the straw is
soft enough for me.  But St. Joseph took the child in his arms,
and carried her into the little bed, and there she said her
prayers, and fell asleep.  Next morning when she awoke, she
wanted to say good morning to St. Joseph, but she did not see him.
Then she got up and looked for him, but could not find him
anywhere.  At last she perceived, behind the door, a bag with
money so heavy that she could just carry it, and on it was
written that it was for the child who had slept there that night.
On this she took the bag, bounded away with it, and got
safely to her mother, and as she gave her mother all the money,
she could not help being satisfied with her.
The next day, the second child also took a fancy to go into
the forest.  Her mother gave her a much larger piece of pancake
and bread.  It happened with her just as with the first child.
In the evening she came to St. Joseph's little hut, who gave her
roots for a thick soup.  When it was ready, he likewise said
to her, I am so hungry, give me some of your food.  Then the
child said, you may have your share.  Afterwards, when St.
Joseph offered her his bed and wanted to lie on the straw, she
replied, no, lie down in the bed, there is plenty of room for
both of us.  St. Joseph took her in his arms and put her in the
bed, and laid himself on the straw.
In the morning when the child awoke and looked for St. Joseph,
he had vanished, but behind the door she found a little sack
of money that was about as long as a hand, and on it was
written that it was for the child who had slept there last
night.  So she took the little bag and ran home with it, and
took it to her mother, but she secretly kept two pieces for
herself.
The eldest daughter had by this time grown inquisitive, and the
next morning also insisted on going out into the forest.  Her
mother gave her pancakes - as many as she wanted, and bread
and cheese as well.  In the evening she found St. Joseph in his
little hut, just as the two others had found him.  When the
soup was ready
and St. Joseph said, I am so hungry, give me some of the food,
the girl answered, wait until I am satisfied, then if there is
anything left you shall have it.  But she ate nearly the
whole of it, and St. Joseph had to scrape the dish.  Afterwards,
the good old man offered her his bed, and wanted to lie on
the straw.  She took it without making any opposition, laid
herself down in the little bed, and left the hard straw to the
white-haired man.  Next morning when she awoke, St. Joseph was
not to be found, but she did not trouble herself about that.  She
looked behind the door for a money-bag.  She fancied something
was lying on the ground, but as she could not very well distinguish
what it was, she stooped down, so that she touched it with her
nose, where it remained hanging, and when she got up again,
she saw, to her horror, that it was a second nose, which was
hanging fast to her own.  Then she began to scream and howl,
but that did no good.  She always had to look at her nose, for
it stretched out so far.  Then she ran out and screamed without
stopping till she met St. Joseph, at whose feet she fell and begged
until, out of pity, he took the nose off her again, and even
gave her two farthings.  When she got home, her mother was standing
before the door, and asked, what have you had given to you.  Then
she
lied and said, a great bag of money, but I have lost it on the way.
Lost it. Cried the mother.  Oh, but we will soon find it again,
and took her by the hand, and wanted to seek it with her.  At
first she began to cry, and did not wish to go, but at last she
went.  On the way, however, so many lizards and snakes broke
loose on both of them, that they did not know how to save
themselves.  At last they stung the wicked child to death, and
they stung the mother in the foot, because she had not brought
her up better.
Three hundred years before the birth of the Lord christ, there
lived a mother who had twelve sons, but was so poor and needy
that she no longer knew how she was to keep them alive.  She
prayed to God daily that he would grant that all her sons might
be on the earth with the redeemer who was promised.  When her
necessity became still greater she sent one of them after the
other out into the world to seek their bread.  The eldest was
called peter, and he went out and had already walked a long
way, a whole day's journey, when he came into a great forest.
He sought for a way out, but could find none, and went farther
and farther astray, and at the same time felt such great hunger
that he could scarcely stand.  At length he became so weak that
he was forced to lie down, and he believed death to be at
hand.  Suddenly there stood beside him a small boy who shone
with brightness, and was as beautiful and kind as an angel.
The child smote his little hands together, until peter was
forced to look up and see him.  Then the child said, why are
you sitting there in such trouble.  Alas. Answered peter, I
am going about the world seeking bread, that I may yet see the
dear savior who is promised, that is my greatest desire.  The
child said, come with me, and your wish shall be fulfilled.  He
took poor peter by the hand, and led him between some cliffs to a
great cavern.  When they entered it, everything was shining
with gold, silver, and crystal, and in the midst of it twelve
cradles were standing side by side.  Then said the little angel,
lie down in the first, and sleep a while, I will rock you.
Peter did so, and the angel sang to him and rocked him until
he was alseep. And when he was asleep, the second brother came
also, guided thither by his guardian angel, and he was rocked
to sleep like the first, and thus came the others, one after
the other, until all twelve lay there sleeping in the golden
cradles.  They slept, however, three hundred years, until the
night when the savior of the world was born.  Then they awoke,
and were with him on earth, and were called the twelve apostles.
There was once a poor woman who had two children.  The youngest
had to go every day into the forest to fetch wood.  Once when
she had gone a long way to seek it, a little child, who
was quite strong, came and helped her industriously to pick up
the wood and carry it home, and then before a moment had passed
the strange child disappeared.  The child told her mother this,
but at first she would not believe it.  At length she brought
a rose home, and told her mother that the beautiful child had
given her this
rose, and had told her that when it was in full bloom, he would
return.  The mother put the rose in water.  One morning her
child could not get out of bed.  The mother went to the bed and
found her dead, but she lay looking very happy.  On the same
morning, the rose was in full bloom.
There was once a king's son who went out into the world, and
he was full of thought and sad.  He looked at the sky, which
was so beautifully pure and blue, then he sighed, and said,
how well must all be with one up there in heaven.
Then he saw a poor gray-haired man who was coming along the
road towards him, and he spoke to him, and asked, how can I
get to heaven.  The man answered, by poverty and humility.  Put
on my ragged clothes, wander about the world for seven years,
and get to know what misery is, take no money, but if you are hungry
ask compassionate hearts for a bit of bread.  In this way you will
reach heaven.
Then the king's son took off his magnificent coat, and wore in
its place the beggar's garment, went out into the wide world,
and suffered great misery.  He took nothing but a little food,
said nothing, but prayed to the Lord to take him into his
heaven.  When the
seven years were over, he returned to his father's palace, but no
one recognized him.  He said to the servants, go and tell my
parents that I have come back again.  But the servants did not
believe it, and laughed and left him standing there.  Then said he,
go and tell it to my brothers that they may come down, for I
should so like to see them again.  The servants would not do that
either, but at last one of them went, and told it to the king's
children, but these did not believe it, and did not trouble
themselves about it.  Then he wrote a letter to his mother, and
described to her all his misery, but he did not say that he was
her son.  So out of pity, the queen had a place under the stairs
assigned to him, and food taken to him daily by two servants.  But
one of them was ill-natured and said, why should the beggar have
the good food, and kept it for himself, or gave it to the
dogs, and took the weak, emaciated beggar nothing but water.  The
other, however, was honest, and took the beggar what was sent to
him.  It was little, but he could live on it for a while, and
all the time he was quite patient, but he grew continually weaker.
As his illness increased, he desired to receive the last sacrament.
When the mass was being celebrated, all the bells in the town and
neighborhood began to ring of their own accord.  After mass the
priest went to the poor man under the stairs, and there he lay
dead.  In one hand he had a rose, in the other a lily, and beside
him was a paper on which was written his history.
When he was buried, a rose grew on one side of his grave, and a
lily on the other.
There were once upon a time two sisters, one of whom had no
children and was rich, and the other had five and was a
widow, and so poor that she no longer had food enough to satisfy
herself and her children.  In her need, therefore, she went to
her sister, and said, my children and I are suffering the greatest
hunger.  You are rich, give me a mouthful of bread.  The very
rich sister was as hard as a stone, and said, I myself have nothing
in the house, and drove away the poor creature with harsh words.
After some time the husband of the rich sister came home, and was
just going to cut himself a piece of bread, but when he made the
first cut into the loaf, out flowed red blood.  When the woman
saw that she was terrified and told him what had occurred.  He
hurried away to help the widow and her children, but when he
entered her room, he found her praying.  She had her two youngest
children in her arms, and the three eldest were lying dead.  He
offered her food, but she answered, for earthly food have we no
longer any desire.  God has already satisfied the hunger of three
of us, and he will hearken to our supplications likewise.
Scarcely had she uttered these words than the two little ones
drew their last breath, whereupon her heart broke, and she sank
down dead.
There was once upon a time a hermit who lived in a forest at the
foot of a mountain, and passed his time in prayer and good works,
and every evening he carried, to the glory of God, two pails of
water up the mountain.  Many a beast drank of it, and many a plant
was refreshed by it, for on the heights above, a strong wind blew
continually, which dried the air and the ground, and the wild
birds which dread mankind wheel about there, and with their sharp
eyes search for a drink.  And because the hermit was so pious, an
angel of God, visible to his eyes, went up with him, counted his
steps, and when the work was completed, brought him his food, even
as the prophet of old was by God's command fed by the raven.  When
the hermit in his piety had already reached a great age, it
happened that he once saw from afar a poor sinner being taken to
the gallows.  He said carelessly to himself, there, that one is
getting his deserts.  In the evening, when he was carrying the
water up the mountain, the angel who usually accompanied him did
not appear, and also brought him no food.  Then he was terrified,
and searched his heart, and tried to think how he could have
sinned, as God was so angry, but he did not discover it.  Then
he neither ate nor drank, threw himself down on the ground, and
prayed day and night.  And as he was one day thus bitterly
weeping in the forest, he heard a little bird singing beautifully
and delightfully, and then he was still more troubled and said,
how joyously you sing, the Lord is not angry with you.  Ah, if
you could but tell me how I can have offended him, that I might
do penance, and then my heart also would be glad again.  Then the
bird began to speak and said, you have done injustice, in that
you have condemned a poor sinner who was being led to the gallows,
and for that the Lord is angry with you.  He alone sits in
judgement.  However, if you will do penance and repent your sins,
he will forgive you.  Then the angel stood beside him with a dry
branch in his hand and said, you shall carry this dry branch until
three green twigs sprout out of it, but at night when you will
sleep, you shall lay it under your head.  You shall beg your
bread from door to door, and not tarry more than one night in the
same house.  That is the penance which the Lord lays on you.
Then the hermit took the piece of wood, and went back into the
world, which he had not seen for so long.  He ate and drank
nothing but what was given him at the doors.  Many petitions,
however, were not listened to, and many doors remained shut to
him, so that he often did not get a crumb of bread.
Once when he had gone from door to door from morning till night,
and no one had given him anything, and no one would shelter him
for the night, he went forth into a forest, and at last found a
cave which someone had made, and an old woman was sitting in it.
Then said he, good woman, keep me with you in your house for
this night.  But she said, no, I dare not, even if I wished,
I have three sons who are wicked and wild, if they come home
from their robbing expedition, and find you, they would kill us
both.  The hermit said, let me stay, they will do no injury
either to you or to me.  And the old woman was compassionate,
and let herself be persuaded.  Then the man lay down beneath the
stairs, and put the bit of wood under his head.  When the old
woman saw him do that, she asked the reason of it, on which he
told her that he carried the bit of wood about with him for a
penance, and used it at night for a pillow, and that he had
offended the Lord, because, when he had seen a poor sinner on
the way to the gallows, he had said he was getting his deserts.
Then the woman began to weep and cried, if the Lord punishes one
single word, how will it fare with my sons when they appear
before him in judgment.
At midnight the robbers came home and blustered and stormed.
They made a fire, and when it had lighted up the cave and they
saw a man lying under the stairs, they fell in a rage and cried to
their mother, who is the man.  Have we not forbidden anyone
whomsoever to be taken in.  Then said the mother, let him alone,
it is a poor sinner who is expiating his crime.  The robbers
asked, what has he done.  Old man, cried they, tell us your sins.
The old man raised himself and told them how he, by one single
word, had so sinned that God was angry with him, and how he was
now expiating this crime.  The robbers were so powerfully touched
in their hearts by this story, that they were shocked with their
life up to this time, reflected, and began with hearty
repentance to do penance for it.  The hermit, after he had
converted the three sinners, lay down to sleep again under the
stairs.  In the morning, however, they found him dead, and out of
the dry wood on which his head lay, three green twigs had grown
up on high.  Thus the Lord had once more received him into his
favor.
In a large town there was an old woman who sat in the evening alone
in her room thinking how she had lost first her husband, then
both her children, then one by one all her relatives, and at
length, that very day, her last friend, and now she was quite
alone and desolate.  She was very sad at heart, and heaviest of
all her losses to her was that of her sons, and in her pain she
blamed God for it.  She was still sitting lost in thought, when
all at once she heard the bells ringing for early prayer.  She was
surprised that she had thus in her sorrow watched through the
whole night, and lighted her lantern and went to church.  It was
already lighted up when she arrived, but not as it usually was
with wax candles, but with a dim
light.  It was also crowded already with people, and all the
seats were filled, and when the old woman got to her usual place
it also was not empty, but the whole bench was entirely full.  And
when she looked at the people, they were none other than her dead
relatives who were sitting there in their old-fashioned garments,
but with pale faces.  They neither spoke nor sang, but a soft
humming and whispering was heard all over the church.  Then an
aunt of hers stood up, stepped forward, and said to the poor old
woman, look there beside the altar, and you will see your sons.
The old woman looked there, and saw her two children, one hanging
on the gallows, the other bound to the wheel.  Then said the aunt,
behold, so would it have been with them if they had lived, and if
the good God had not taken them to himself when they were
innocent children.  The old woman went trembling home, and on her
knees thanked God for having dealt with her more kindly than she
had been able to understand, and on the third day she lay down
and died.
One afternoon the christ-child had laid himself in his cradle-bed
and had fallen asleep.  Then his mother came to him, looked at him
full of gladness, and said, have you laid yourself down to sleep,
my child.  Sleep sweetly, and in the meantime, I will go into the
wood, and fetch you a handful of strawberries, for I know that you
will be pleased with them when you awake.  In the wood outside,
she found a spot with the most beautiful strawberries, but as she
was stooping to gather one, an adder sprang up out of the grass.
She was alarmed, left the strawberries where they were, and
hastened away.  The adder darted after her, but our lady, as you
can readily understand, knew what it was best to do.  She hid
herself behind a hazel-bush, and stood there until the adder had
crept away again.  Then she gathered the strawberries, and as she
set out on her way home she said, as the hazel-bush has been my
protection this time, it shall in future protect others also.
Therefore, from the most remote times, a green hazel-branch has
been the safest protection against adders, snakes, and everything
else which creeps on the earth.
A certain cat had made the acquaintance of a mouse, and had
said so much to her about the great love and friendship she
felt for her, that at length the mouse agreed that they should
live and keep house together.  But we must make a provision
for winter, or else we shall suffer from hunger, said the cat,
and you, little mouse, cannot venture everywhere, or you will be
caught in a trap some day.  The good advice was followed, and a
pot of fat was bought, but they did not know where to put it.
At length, after much consideration, the cat said, I know no place
where it will be better stored up than in the church, for no one
dares take anything away from there.  We will set it beneath the
altar, and not touch it until we are really in need of it.  So
the pot was placed in safety, but it was not long before the cat
had a great yearning for it, and said to the mouse, I want to
tell you something, little mouse, my cousin has brought a little
son into the world, and has asked me to be godmother, he is white
with brown spots, and I am to hold him over the font at the
christening.  Let me go out to-day, and you look after the house
by yourself.  Yes, yes, answered the mouse, by all means go, and if
you get anything very good to eat, think of
me, I should like a drop of sweet red christening wine myself.
All this, however, was untrue, the cat had no cousin, and had not
been asked to be godmother.  She went straight to the church, stole
to the pot of fat, began to lick at it, and licked the top of the
fat off.  Then she took a walk upon the roofs of the town, looked
out for opportunities, and then stretched herself in the sun, and
licked her lips whenever she thought of the pot of fat, and not
until it was evening did she return home.  Well, here you are
again, said the mouse, no doubt you have had a merry day.  All went
off well, answered the cat.  What name did they give the child.
Top off, said the cat quite coolly.  Top off, cried the mouse,
that is a very odd and uncommon name, is it a usual one in your
family.  What does that matter, said the cat, it is no worse than
crumb-stealer, as your God-children are called.
Before long the cat was seized by another fit of yearning.  She
said to the mouse, you must do me a favor, and once more manage
the house for a day alone.  I am again asked to be godmother, and,
as the child has a white ring round its neck, I cannot refuse.
The good mouse consented, but the cat crept behind the town walls
to the church, and devoured half the pot of fat.  Nothing ever
seems so good as what one keeps to oneself, said she, and was quite
satisfied with her day's work.  When she went home the mouse
inquired, and what was this child christened.  Half-done, answered
the cat.  Half-done.  What are you saying.  I never heard the name
in my life, I'll wager anything it is not in the calendar.
The cat's mouth soon began to water for some more licking.  All
good things go in threes, said she, I am asked to stand godmother
again.  The child is quite black, only it has white paws, but with
that exception, it has not a single white hair on its whole body,
this only happens once every few years, you will let me go, won't
you.  Top-off.  Half-done, answered the mouse, they are such odd
names, they make me very thoughtful.  You sit at home, said the
cat, in your dark-grey fur coat and long tail, and are filled
with fancies, that's because you do not go out in the daytime.
During the cat's absence the mouse cleaned the house, and put it
in order
but the greedy cat entirely emptied the pot of fat.  When
everything is eaten up one has some peace, said she to herself,
and well filled and fat she did not return home till night.  The
mouse at once asked what name had been given to the third child.
It will not please you more than the others, said the cat.  He
is called all-gone.  All-gone, cried the mouse, that is the most
suspicious name of all.  I have never seen it in print.  All-gone,
what can that mean, and she shook her head, curled herself up,
and lay down to sleep.
From this time forth no one invited the cat to be godmother, but
when the winter had come and there was no longer anything to be
found outside, the mouse thought of their provision, and said,
come cat, we will go to our pot of fat which we have stored up
for ourselves - we shall enjoy that.  Yes, answered the cat, you
will enjoy it as much as you would enjoy sticking that dainty
tongue of yours out of the window.  They set out on their way,
but when they arrived, the pot of fat certainly was still in its
place, but it was empty.  Alas, said the mouse, now I see what has
happened, now it comes to light.  You are a true friend.  You
have devoured all when you were standing godmother.  First top off
then half done, then -.  Will you hold your tongue, cried the
cat, one word more and I will eat you too.  All gone was already
on the poor mouse's lips, scarcely had she spoken it before the
cat sprang on her, seized her, and swallowed her down.  Verily,
that is the way of the world.
There was once a wonderful musician, who went quite forlorn
through a forest and thought of all manner of things, and when
nothing was left for him to think about, he said to himself,
time is beginning to pass heavily with me here in the forest,
I will fetch hither a good companion for myself.  Then he took his
fiddle from his back, and played so that it echoed through the
trees.  It was not long before a wolf came trotting through the
thicket towards him.  Ah, here is a wolf coming.  I have no desire
for him, said the musician but the wolf came nearer and said to
him, ah, dear musician, how beautifully you play.  I should like to
learn that, too.  It is soon learnt, the musician replied, you
have only to do all that I bid you.  Oh, musician, said the wolf,
I will obey you as a scholar obeys his master.  The musician bade
him follow, and when they had gone part of the way together, they
came to an old oak-tree which was hollow inside, and cleft in the
middle.  Look, said the musician, if you will learn to fiddle, put
your fore paws into this crevice.  The wolf obeyed, but the
musician quickly picked up a stone and with one blow wedged his
two paws so fast that he was forced to stay there like a prisoner.
Wait there until I come back again, said the musician, and went
his way.
After a while he again said to himself, time is beginning to pass
heavily with me here in the forest, I will fetch hither another
companion, and took his fiddle and again played in the forest.  It
was not long before a fox came creeping through the trees towards
him.  Ah, there's a fox coming, said the musician.  I have no
desire for him.  The fox came up to him and said, oh, dear
musician, how beautifully you play.  I should like to learn that
too.  That is soon learnt, said the musician.  You have only to
do everything that I bid you.  Oh, musician, then said the fox, I
will obey you as a scholar obeys his master.  Follow me, said the
musician, and when they had walked a part of the way, they came to
a footpath, with high bushes on both sides of it.  There the
musician stood still, and from one side bent a young hazel-bush
down to the ground, and put his foot on the end of it.  Then he
bent down a young tree from the other side as well, and said, now
little fox, if you will learn something, give me your left front
paw.  The fox obeyed, and the musician fastened his paw to the
left bough.  Little fox, said he, now reach me your right paw.
And he tied it to the right bough.  When he had examined whether
the knots were firm enough, he let go, and the bushes sprang up
again, and jerked up the little fox, so that it hung struggling
in the air.  Wait there till I come back again, said the musician,
and went on his way.
Again he said to himself, time is beginning to pass heavily with
me here in the forest, I will fetch hither another companion.
So he took his fiddle, and the sound echoed through the forest.
Then a little hare came springing towards him.  Ah, a hare is
coming, said the musician, I do not want him.  Ah, dear
musician, said the hare, how beautifully you fiddle, I too,
should like to learn that.  That is soon learnt, said the
musician, you have only to do everything that I bid you.
Oh, musician, replied the little hare, I will obey you as a
scholar obeys his master.  They went a part of the way together
until they came to an open space in the forest, where stood an
aspen tree.  The musician tied a long string round the little
hare's neck,
the other end of which he fastened to the tree.  Now briskly,
little hare, run twenty times round the tree, cried the musician,
and the little hare obeyed, and when it had run round twenty times,
it had twisted the string twenty times round the trunk of the tree,
and the little hare was caught, and let it pull and tug as it
liked, it only made the string cut into its tender neck.  Wait
there till I come back, said the musician, and went onwards.
The wolf, in the meantime, had pushed and pulled and bitten at
the stone, and had worked so long that he had set his feet at
liberty and had drawn them once more out of the cleft.  Full of
anger and rage he hurried after the musician and wanted to tear
him to pieces.  When the fox saw him running, he began to lament,
and cried with all his might, brother wolf, come to my help, the
musician has betrayed me.  The wolf drew down the little tree,
bit the cord in two, and freed the fox, who went with him to take
revenge on the musician.  They found the tied-up hare, whom
likewise they rescued, and then they all sought the enemy
together.
The musician had once more played his fiddle as he went on his
way, and this time he had been more fortunate.  The sound
reached the ears of a poor wood-cutter, who instantly, whether
he would or no, gave up his work and came with his hatchet under
his arm to listen to the music.  At last comes the right
companion, said the musician, for I was seeking a human being,
and no wild beast.  And he began and played so beautifully and
delightfully that the poor man stood there as if bewitched, and
his heart leaped with gladness.  And as he thus stood, the wolf,
the fox, and the hare came up, and he saw well that they had some
evil design.  So he raised his glittering axe and placed
himself before the musician, as if to say, whoso wishes to touch
him let him beware, for he will have to deal with me.  Then the
beasts were terrified and ran back into the forest.  The
musician, however, played once more to the man out of
gratitude, and then went onwards.
The cock once said to the hen, it is now the time when the nuts
are ripe, so let us go to the hill together and for once
eat our fill before the squirrel takes them all away.  Yes,
replied the hen, come, we will have some fun together.  Then
they went away to the hill, and as it was a bright day they
stayed till evening.  Now I do not know whether it was that they
had eaten till they were too fat, or whether they had become
too proud, but they would not go home on foot, and the cock had
to build a little carriage of nut-shells.  When it was ready,
the little hen seated herself in it and said to the cock, you can
just harness yourself to it.  I like that. Said the cock.  I
would rather go home on foot than let myself be harnessed to it.
No, that is not our bargain.  I do not mind being coachman
and sitting on the box, but drag it myself I will not.
As they were thus disputing, a duck quacked at them, you thieving
folks, who bade you go to my nut-hill.  Wait, you shall suffer
for it, and ran with open beak at the cock.  But the cock also was
not idle, and fell boldly on the duck, and at last wounded her
so with his spurs that she begged for mercy, and willingly let
herself be harnessed to the carriage as a punishment.  The
little cock now seated himself on the box and was coachman, and
thereupon they went off at a gallop, with the cock crying, duck,
go as fast as you can.  When they had driven a part of the way
they met two foot-passengers, a pin and a needle.  They cried,
stop. Stop. And said that it would soon be as dark as pitch,
and then they could not go a step further, and that it was so
dirty on the road, and asked if they could not get into the
carriage for a while.  They had been at the tailor's public-house
by the gate, and had stayed too long over the beer.  As they were
thin people, who did not take up much room,
the cock let them both get in, but they had to promise him and his
little hen not to step on their feet.  Late in the evening they
came to an inn, and as they did not like to go further by night,
and as the duck also was not strong on her feet, and fell from
one side to the other, they went in.  The host at first made many
objections, his house was already full, besides he thought they
could not be very distinguished persons.  But at last, as they
made pleasant speeches, and told him that he should have the
egg which the little hen had laid on the way, and should likewise
keep the duck, which laid one every day, he at length said that
they might stay the night.  And now they had themselves well
served, and feasted and had a high good time.  Early in the
morning, when day was breaking and every one was asleep, the
cock awoke the hen, brought the egg, pecked it open, and they
ate it together, but they threw the shell on the hearth.  Then
they went to the needle which was still asleep, took it by
the head and stuck it into the cushion of the landlord's chair,
and put the pin in his towel, and at last without more ado they
fled away over the heath.  The duck who liked to sleep in
the open air and had stayed in the yard, heard them going away,
made herself merry and found a stream, down which she swam, which
was a much quicker way of traveling than being harnessed to a
carriage.  The host did not get out of bed until a couple of
hours later.  He washed himself and was about to dry himself, when
the pin went over his face and made a red scratch from one ear
to the other.  After this he went into the kitchen and wanted
to light a pipe, but when he came to the hearth the egg-shell
darted into his eyes.  This morning everything attacks my head,
said he, and angrily sat down on his grandfather's chair, but
he quickly started up again and cried, ow, for the needle had
pricked him still worse than the pin, and not in the head.  Now
he was thoroughly angry, and suspected the guests who had come
so late the night before.  And when he went in search of them,
they were gone.  Then he made a vow to take no more ragamuffins
into his house, for they consume much, pay for nothing, and play
mischievous tricks into the bargain by way of gratitude.
In a village dwelt a poor old woman, who had gathered together a
dish of beans and wanted to cook them.  So she made a fire on
her hearth, and that it might burn the quicker, she lighted it
with a handful of straw.  When she was emptying the beans into
the pan, one dropped without her observing it, and lay on the
ground beside a straw, and soon afterwards a burning coal from
the fire leapt down to the two.  Then the straw began and said,
dear friends, from whence do you come here.  The coal replied,
I fortunately sprang out of the fire, and if I had not escaped
by sheer force, my death would have been certain, I should have
been burnt to ashes.  The bean said, I too have escaped with
a whole skin, but if the old woman had got me into the pan,
I should have been made into broth without any mercy, like my
comrades.  And would a better fate have fallen to my lot, said
the straw.  The old woman has destroyed all my brethren in
fire and smoke.  She seized sixty of them at once, and took
their lives.  I luckily slipped through her fingers.
But what are we to do now, said the coal.
I think, answered the bean, that as we have so fortunately
escaped death, we should keep together like good companions, and
lest a new mischance should overtake us here, we should go away
together, and repair to a foreign country.
The proposition pleased the two others, and they set out on their
way together.  Soon, however, they came to a little brook, and
as there was no bridge or foot-plank, they did not know how they
were to get over it.  The straw hit on a good idea, and said,
I will lay myself straight across, and then you can walk over on
me as on a bridge.  The straw therefore stretched itself from
one bank to the other, and the coal, who was of an impetuous
disposition, tripped quite boldly on to the newly-built bridge.
But when she had reached the middle, and heard the water rushing
beneath her, she was, after all, afraid, and stood still, and
ventured no farther.  The straw, however, began to burn, broke
in two pieces, and fell into the stream.  The coal slipped after
her, hissed when she got into the water, and breathed her last.
The bean, who had prudently stayed behind on the shore, could
not but laugh at the event, was unable to stop, and laughed so
heartily that she burst.  It would have been all over with her,
likewise, if, by good fortune, a tailor who was traveling in
search of work, had not sat down to rest by the brook.  As he had
a compassionate heart he pulled out his needle and thread, and
sewed her together.  The bean thanked him most prettily, but
as the tailor used black thread, all beans since then have a
black seam.
There was once upon a time a fisherman who lived with his wife
in a pig-stye close by the sea, and every day he went out fishing.
And he fished, and he fished.  And once he was sitting with his
rod, looking at the clear water, and he sat and he sat.  Then
his line suddenly went down, far down below, and when
he drew it up again, he brought out a large flounder.  Then the
flounder said to him, hark, you fisherman, I pray you, let me
live, I am no flounder really, but an enchanted prince.  What
good will it do you to kill me.  I should not be good to eat, put
me in the water again, and let me go.  Come, said the fisherman,
there is no need for so many words about it - a fish that can
talk I should certainly let go, anyhow.  And with that he put
him back again into the clear water, and the flounder went to the
bottom, leaving a long streak of blood behind him.  Then the
fisherman got up and went home to his wife in the pig-stye.
Husband, said the woman, have you caught nothing to-day.  No, said
the man, I did catch a flounder, who said he was an enchanted
prince, so I let him go again.  Did you not wish for anything
first, said the woman.  No, said the man, what should I wish
for.  Ah, said the woman, it is surely hard to have to live
always in this pig-stye which stinks and is so disgusting.  You
might have wished for a little hut for us.  Go back and call
him.  Tell him we want to have a little hut, he will certainly
give us that.  Ah, said the man, why should I go there again.
Why, said the woman, you did catch him, and you let him go again.
He is sure to do it.  Go at once.  The man still did not quite
like to go, but did not like to oppose his wife either, and
went to the sea.
When he got there the sea was all green and yellow, and no
longer so smooth, so he stood still and said,
          flounder, flounder in the sea,
          come, I pray thee, here to me.
          For my wife, good ilsabil,
          wills not as I'd have her will.
Then the flounder came swimming to him and said, well what does
she want, then.  Ah, said the man, I did catch you, and
my wife says I really ought to have wished for something.
She does not like to live in a pig-stye any longer.  She would
like to have a hut.  Go, then, said the flounder, she has it
already.
When the man went home, his wife was no longer in the stye,
but instead of it there stood a hut, and she was sitting on a
bench before the door.  Then she took him by the hand and said
to him, just come inside.  Look, now isn't this a great deal
better.  So they went in, and there was a small porch, and a
pretty little parlor and bedroom, and a kitchen and pantry,
with the best of furniture, and fitted up with the most
beautiful things made of tin and brass, whatsoever was wanted.
And behind the hut there was a  small yard, with hens and ducks,
and a little garden with flowers and fruit.  Look, said the
wife, is not that nice.  Yes, said the husband, and so it shall
remain - now we will live quite contented.  We will think about
that said the wife.  With that they ate something and went to
bed.
Everything went well for a week or a fortnight, and then the
woman said, hark you, husband, this hut is far too small for us,
and the garden and yard are little.  The flounder might just as
well have given us a larger house.  I should like to live in a
great stone castle.  Go to the flounder, and tell him to give
us a castle.  Ah, wife, said the man, the hut is quite good
enough.  Why whould we live in a castle.  What. Said the
woman.  Just go there, the flounder can always do that.  No,
wife, said the man, the flounder has just given us the hut,
I do not like to go back so soon, it might make him angry.
Go, said the woman, he can do it quite easily, and will be glad
to do it.  Just you go to him.
The man's heart grew heavy, and he would not go.  He said to
himself, it is not right, and yet he went.  And when he came
to the sea the water was quite purple and dark-blue, and grey
and thick, and no longer so green and yellow, but it was still
quiet.  And he stood there and said,
          flounder, flounder in the sea,
          come, I pray thee, here to me.
          For my wife, good ilsabil,
          wills not as I'd have her will.
Well, what does she want, now, said the flounder.  Alas, said
the man, half scared, she wants to live in a great stone castle.
Go to it, then, she is standing before the door, said the
flounder.
Then the man went away, intending to go home, but when he
got there, he found a great stone palace, and his wife was
just standing on the steps going in, and she took him by the
hand and said, come in.  So he went in with her, and in the
castle was a great hall paved with marble, and many servants,
who flung wide the doors.  And the walls were all bright with
beautiful hangings, and in the rooms were chairs and tables
of pure gold, and crystal chandeliers hung from the ceiling,
and all the rooms and bedrooms had carpets, and food and wine
of the very best were standing on all the tables, so that they
nearly broke down beneath it.  Behind the house, too, there
was a great court-yard, with stables for horses and cows, and
the very best of carriages.  There was a magnificent large
garden, too, with the most beautiful flowers and fruit-trees,
and a park quite half a mile long, in which were stags, deer,
and hares, and everything that could be desired.  Come, said
the woman, isn't that beautiful.  Yes, indeed, said the man,
now let it be, and we will live in this beautiful castle
and be content.  We will consider about that, said the woman,
and sleep upon it.  Thereupon they went to bed.
Next morning the wife awoke first, and it was just daybreak,
and from her bed she saw the beautiful country lying before
her.  Her husband was still stretching himself, so she poked
him in the side with her elbow, and said, get up, husband,
and just peep out of the window.  Look you, couldn't we be the
king over all that land.  Go to the flounder, we will be the
king.  Ah, wife, said the man, why should we be king.  I
do not want to be king.  Well, said the wife, if you won't be
king, I will.  Go to the flounder, for I will be king.  Ah,
wife, said the man, why do you want to be king.  I do not like
to say that to him.  Why not, said the woman.  Go to him this
instant.  I must be king.  So the man went, and was quite
unhappy because his wife wished to be king.  It is not right,
it is not right, thought he.  He did not wish to go, but yet
he went.
And when he came to the sea, it was quite dark-grey, and the
water heaved up from below, and smelt putrid.  Then he went
and stood by it, and said,

          flounder, flounder in the sea,
          come, I pray thee, here to me.
          For my wife, good ilsabil,
          wills not as I'd have her will.
Well, what does she want, now. Said the flounder.  Alas, said
the man, she wants to be king.  Go to her.  She is king
already.
So the man went, and when he came to the palace, the castle
had become much larger, and had a great tower and magnificent
ornaments, and the sentinel was standing before the door, and
there were numbers of soldiers with kettle-drums and trumpets.
And
when he went inside the house, everything was of real marble
and gold, with velvet covers and great golden tassels.  Then
the doors of the hall were opened, and there was the court in
all its splendor, and his wife was sitting on a high throne
of gold and diamonds, with a great crown of gold on her head,
and a sceptre of pure gold and jewels in her hand, and on
both sides of her stood her maids-in-waiting in a row, each
of them always one head shorter than the last.
Then he went and stood before her, and said, ah, wife, and
now you are king.  Yes, said the woman, now I am king.  So
he stood and looked at her, and when he had looked at her thus
for some time, he said, and now that you are king, let all else
be, now we will wish for nothing more.  No, husband, said the
woman, quite anxiously, I find time passes very heavily, I can
bear it no longer.  Go to the flounder - I am king, but I must
be emperor, too.  Oh, wife, why do you wish to be emperor.
Husband, said she, go to the flounder.  I will be emperor.
Alas, wife, said the man, he cannot make you emperor.  I may not
say that to the fish.  There is only one emperor in the land.  An
emperor the flounder cannot make you.  I assure you he cannot.
What. Said the woman, I am the king, and you are nothing but
my husband.  Will you go this moment.  Go at once.  If he can
make a king he can make an emperor.  I will be emperor.  Go
instantly.  So he was forced to go.  As the man went, however, he
was troubled in mind, and thought to himself, it will not end
well.  It will not end well.  Emperor is too shameless.  The
flounder will at last be tired out.
With that he reached the sea, and the sea was quite black and
thick, and began to boil up from below, so that it threw up
bubbles, and such a sharp wind blew over it that it curdled, and
the man was afraid.  Then he went and stood by it, and said,
          flounder, flounder in the sea,
          come, I pray thee, here to me.
          For my wife, good ilsabil,
          wills not as I'd have her will.
Well, what does she want, now, said the flounder.  Alas, flounder,
said he, my wife wants to be emperor.  Go to her, said the
flounder.  She is emperor already.
So the man went, and when he got there the whole palace was made
of polished marble with alabaster figures and golden ornaments,
and soldiers were marching before the door blowing trumpets,
and beating cymbals and drums.  And in the house, barons, and
counts, and dukes were going about as servants.  Then they opened
the doors to him, which were of pure gold.  And when he
entered, there sat his wife on a throne, which was made of one
piece of gold, and was quite two miles high.  And she wore a great
golden crown that was three yards high, and set with diamonds and
carbuncles, and in one hand she had the sceptre, and in the
other the imperial orb.  And on both sides of her stood the
yeomen of the guard in two rows, each being smaller than the one
before him, from the biggest giant, who was two miles high, to the
very smallest dwarf, just as big as my little finger.  And
before it stood a number of princes and dukes.
Then the man went and stood among them, and said, wife, are you
emperor now.  Yes, said she, now I am emperor.  Then he stood
and looked at her well, and when he had looked at her thus for
some time, he said, ah, wife, be content, now that you are
emperor.  Husband, said she, why are you standing there.  Now, I
am emperor, but I will be pope too.  Go to the flounder.  Oh,
wife, said the man, what will you not wish for.  You cannot be
pope.  There is but one in christendom.  He cannot make you pope.
Husband, said she, I will be pope.  Go immediately, I must be
pope this very day.  No, wife, said the man, I do not like to
say that to him.  That would not do, it is too much.  The flounder
can't make you pope.  Husband, said she, what nonsense.  If he
can make an emperor he can make a pope.  Go to him directly.
I am emperor, and you are nothing but my husband.  Will you go
at once.
Then he was afraid and went, but he was quite faint, and
shivered and shook, and his knees and legs trembled.  And a high
wind blew over the land, and the clouds flew, and towards evening
all grew dark, and the leaves fell from the trees, and the water
rose and roared as if it were boiling, and splashed upon the
shore.  And in the distance he saw ships which were firing guns
in their sore need, pitching and tossing on the waves.  And yet
in the midst of the sky there was still a small patch of blue,
though on every side it was as red as in a heavy storm.  So,
full of despair, he went and stood in much fear and said,
          flounder, flounder in the sea,
          come, I pray thee, here to me.
          For my wife, good ilsabil,
          wills not as I'd have her will.
Well, what does she want, now, said the flounder.  Alas, said the
man, she wants to be pope.  Go to her then, said the flounder,
she is pope already.
So he went, and when he got there, he saw what seemed to be a
large church surrounded by palaces.  He pushed his way through
the crowd.  Inside, however, everything was lighted up with
thousands and thousands of candles, and his wife was clad in
gold, and she was sitting on a much higher throne, and had three
great golden crowns on, and round about her there was much
ecclesiastical splendor.  And on both sides of her was a row of
candles the largest of which was as tall as the very tallest tower,
down to the very smallest kitchen candle, and all the emperors
and kings were on their knees before her, kissing her shoe.
Wife, said the man, and looked attentively at her, are you now
pope.  Yes, said she, I am pope.  So he stood and looked at her,
and it was just as if he was looking at the bright sun.  When he
had stood looking at her thus for a short time, he said, ah,
wife, if you are pope, do let well alone.  But she looked as
stiff as a post, and did not move or show any signs of life.
Then said he, wife, now that you are pope, be satisfied, you
cannot become anything greater now.  I will consider about that,
said the woman.  Thereupon they both went to bed, but she was
not satisfied, and greediness let her have no sleep, for she
was continually thinking what there was left for her to be.
The man slept well and soundly, for he had run about a great
deal during the day.  But the woman could not fall asleep at
all, and flung herself from one side to the other the whole
night through, thinking always what more was left for her to
be, but unable to call to mind anything else.  At length the
sun began to rise, and when the woman saw the red of dawn,
she sat up in bed and looked at it.  And when, through the
window, she saw the sun thus rising, she said, cannot I, too,
order the sun and moon to rise.  Husband, she said, poking him
in the ribs with her elbows, wake up.  Go to the flounder, for
I wish to be even as God is.  The man was still half asleep,
but he was so horrified that he fell out of bed.  He thought
he must have heard amiss, and rubbed his eyes, and said, wife,
what are you saying.  Husband, said she, if I can't order the
sun and moon to rise, and have to look on and see the sun
and moon rising, I can't bear it.  I shall not know what it is
to have another happy hour, unless I can make them rise myself.
Then she looked at him so terribly that a shudder ran over
him, and said, go at once.  I wish to be like unto God.  Alas,
wife, said the man, falling on his knees before her, the flounder
cannot do that.  He can make an emperor and a pope.  I beseech
you, go on as you are, and be pope.  Then she fell into a
rage, and her hair flew wildly about her head, she tore open her
bodice, kicked him with her foot, and screamed, I can't stand
it, I can't stand it any longer.  Will you go this instant.
Then he put on his trousers and ran away like a madman.  But
outside a great storm was raging, and blowing so hard that he
could scarcely keep his feet.  Houses and trees toppled over,
the mountains trembled, rocks rolled into the sea, the sky was
pitch black, and it thundered and lightened, and the sea came
in with black waves as high as church-towers and mountains, and
all with crests of white foam at the top.  Then he cried, but
could not hear his own words,
          flounder, flounder in the sea,
          come, I pray thee, here to me.
          For my wife, good ilsabil,
          wills not as I'd have her will.
Well, what does she want, now, said the flounder.  Alas, said
he, she wants to be like unto God.  Go to her, and you will
find her back again in the pig-stye.  And there they are still
living to this day.
Once upon a time a mouse, a bird, and a sausage became
companions, kept house together, lived well and happily in
peace, and wonderfully increased their possessions.  The
bird's work was to fly every day into the forest and bring
back wood.  The mouse had to carry water, light the fire, and
lay the table, but the sausage had to cook.
He who is too well off is always longing for something new.  One
day the bird met with another bird, to whom it related its
excellent circumstances and boasted of them.  The other
bird, however, called it a poor simpleton for his hard work,
but said that the two at home had good times.  For when the
mouse had made her fire and carried her water, she went
into her little room to rest until they called her to lay
the table.  The sausage stayed by the pot, saw that the food
was cooking well, and, when it was nearly time for dinner,
it rolled itself once or twice through the broth or vegetables
and then they were buttered, salted, and ready.  When the bird
came home and laid his burden down, they sat down to dinner,
and after they had had their meal, they slept their fill till
next morning, and that was a splendid life.
Next day the bird, prompted by the other bird, would go no
more into the wood, saying that he had been servant long
enough, and had been made a fool of by them, and that they
must change about for once, and try to arrange it in another
way.  And, though the mouse and the sausage also begged
most earnestly, the bird would have his way, and said it must
be tried.  They cast lots about it, and the lot fell on
the sausage who was to carry wood, the mouse became cook,
and the bird was to fetch water.
What happened.  The little sausage went out towards the wood,
the little bird lighted the fire, the mouse stayed by the
pot and waited alone until little sausage came home and
brought wood for next day.  But the little sausage stayed so
long on the road that they both feared something was amiss,
and the bird flew out a little way in the air to meet it.
Not far off, however, it met a dog on the road who had fallen
on the poor sausage as lawful booty, and had seized and
swallowed it.  The bird charged the dog with an act of
bare-faced robbery, but words were useless, for the dog said
he had found forged letters on the sausage, on which account
its life was forfeited to him.
The bird sadly took up the wood, flew home, and related what
he had seen and heard.  They were much troubled, but agreed
to do their best and remain together.  The bird therefore
laid the table, and the mouse made ready the food, and wanted
to dress it, and to
get into the pot as the sausage used to do, and roll and
creep amongst the vegetables to mix them.  But before she
got into the midst of them she was stopped, and lost her
skin and hair and life in the attempt.
When the bird came to carry in the dinner, no cook was
there.  In its distress the bird threw the wood here and there,
called and searched, but no cook was to be found.  Owing to his
carelessness the wood caught fire, so that a conflagration
broke out.  The bird hastened to fetch water, but the bucket
dropped into the well, and he fell in with it, and could not
recover himself, but had to drown there.
A certain man had a donkey, which had carried the corn-sacks
to the mill indefatigably for many a long year.  But his
strength was going, and he was growing more and more unfit
for work.  Then his master began to consider how he might
best save his keep.  But the donkey, seeing that no good wind
was blowing, ran away and set out on the road to bremen.  There,
he thought, I can surely be a town-musician.  When he had walked
some distance, he found a hound lying on the road, gasping like
one who had run till he was tired.  What are you gasping so for,
you big fellow, asked the donkey.
Ah, replied the hound, as I am old, and daily grow weaker, and
no longer can hunt, my master wanted to kill me, so I took to
flight, but now how am I to earn my bread.
I tell you what, said the donkey, I am going to bremen, and
shall be town-musician there.  Go with me and engage yourself
also as a musician.  I will play the lute, and you shall beat
the kettle-drum.
The hound agreed, and on they went.
Before long they came to a cat, sitting on the path, with a face
like three rainy days.  Now then, old shaver, what has gone
askew with you, asked the donkey.
Who can be merry when his neck is in danger, answered the cat.
Because I am now getting old, and my teeth are worn to
stumps, and I prefer to sit by the fire and spin, rather than
hunt about after mice, my mistress wanted to drown me, so I
ran away.  But now good advice is scarce.  Where am I to go.
Go with us to bremen.  You understand night-music, you
can be a town-musician.
The cat thought well of it, and went with them.  After this the
three fugitives came to a farm-yard, where the cock was sitting
upon the gate, crowing with all his might.  Your crow goes
through and through one, said the donkey.  What is the matter.
I have been foretelling fine weather, because it is the day on
which our lady washes the christ-child's little shirts, and
wants to dry them, said the cock.  But guests are coming for
sunday, so the housewife has no pity, and has told the cook that
she intends to eat me in the soup to-morrow, and this evening
I am to have my head cut off.  Now I am crowing at the top of
my lungs while still I can.
Ah, but red-comb, said the donkey, you had better come away
with us.  We are going to bremen.  You can find something better
than death everywhere.  You have a good voice, and if we make
music together it must have some quality.
The cock agreed to this plan, and all four went on together.
They could not reach the city of bremen in one day, however,
and in the evening they came to a forest where they meant to
pass the night.  The donkey and the hound laid themselves down
under a large tree, the cat and the cock settled themselves in
the branches.  But the cock flew right to the top, where he was
most safe.  Before he went to sleep he looked round on all four
sides, and thought he saw in the distance a little spark burning.
So he called out to his companions that there must be a house
not far off, for he saw a light.  The donkey said, if so, we
had better get up and go on, for the shelter here is bad.  The
hound thought too that a few bones with some meat on would do
him good.
So they made their way to the place where the light was, and
soon saw it shine brighter and grow larger, until they came to
a well-lighted robbers, house.  The donkey, as the biggest, went
to the window and looked in.
What do you see, my grey-horse, asked the cock.  What do I
see, answered the donkey.  A table covered with good things to
eat and drink, and robbers sitting at it enjoying themselves.
That would be the sort of thing for us, said the cock.  Yes,
yes.  Ah, if only we were there, said the donkey.
Then the animals took counsel together how they should manage
to drive away the robbers, and at last they thought of a plan.
The donkey was to place himself with his fore-feet upon the
window-ledge, the hound was to jump on the donkey's back, the
cat was to climb upon the dog, and lastly the cock was to fly
up and perch upon the head of the cat.
When this was done, at a given signal, they began to perform
their music together.  The donkey brayed, the hound barked,
the cat mewed, and the cock crowed.  Then they burst through the
window into the room, shattering the glass.  At this horrible din,
the robbers sprang up, thinking no otherwise than that a ghost
had come in, and fled in a great fright out into the forest.  The
four companions now sat down at the table, well content with
what was left, and ate as if they were going to fast for a
month.
As soon as the four minstrels had done, they put out the light,
and each sought for himself a sleeping-place according to his
nature and what suited him.  The donkey laid himself down upon
some straw in the yard, the hound behind the door, the cat upon
the hearth near the warm ashes, and the cock perched himself
upon a beam of the roof.  And being tired from their long walk,
they soon went to sleep.
When it was past midnight, and the robbers saw from afar that
the light was no longer burning in their house, and all appeared
quiet, the captain said, we ought not to have let ourselves
be frightened out of our wits, and ordered one of them to go
and examine the house.
The messenger finding all still, went into the kitchen to light
a candle, and, taking the glistening fiery eyes of the cat for
live coals, he held a lucifer-match to them to light it.  But
the cat did not understand the joke, and flew in his face, spitting
and scratching.  He was dreadfully frightened, and ran to the
back-door, but the dog, who lay there sprang up and bit his
leg.  And as he ran across the yard by the dunghill, the donkey
gave him a smart kick with its hind foot.  The cock, too, who had
been awakened by the noise, and had become lively, cried down
from the beam, cock-a-doodle-doo.
Then the robber ran back as fast as he could to his captain, and
said, ah, there is a horrible witch sitting in the house, who
spat on me and scratched my face with her long claws.  And by
the door stands a man with a knife, who stabbed me in the leg.
And in the yard there lies a black monster, who beat me with
a wooden club.  And above, upon the roof, sits the judge, who
called out, bring the rogue here to me.  So I got away as well
as I could.
After this the robbers never again dared enter the house.
But it suited the four musicians of bremen so well that they
did not care to leave it any more.  And the mouth of him who
last told this story is still warm.
A louse and a flea kept house together and were brewing beer
in an egg-shell.  Then the little louse fell in and burnt
herself.  At this the little flea began to scream loudly. Then
said the little room-door, little flea, why are you screaming.
Because the louse has burnt herself.
Then the little door began to creak.  At this a little broom in
the corner said, why are you creaking, little door.  Have I not
reason to creak.
          The little louse has burnt herself,
          the little flea is weeping.
So the little broom began to sweep frantically.  Then a little cart
passed by and said, why are you sweeping, little broom.  Have
I not reason to sweep.
          The little louse has burnt herself,
          the little flea is weeping,
          the little door is creaking.
So the little cart said, then I will run, and began to run like
mad.  Then said the ash-heap by which it ran, why are you running
so, little cart.  Have I not reason to run.
          The little louse has burnt herself,
          the little flea is weeping,
          the little door is creaking,
          the little broom is sweeping.
The ash-heap said, then I will burn furiously, and began to burn
in clear flames.  A little tree stood near the ash-heap and
said, ash-heap, why are you burning.  Have I not reason to burn.
          The little louse has burnt herself,
          the little flea is weeping,
          the little door is creaking,
          the little broom is sweeping,
          the little cart is running.
The little tree said, then I will shake myself, and began to
shake herself so that all her leaves fell off.  A girl who came
up with her water-pitcher saw that, and said, little tree, why are
you shaking yourself.  Have I not reason to shake myself.
          The little louse has burnt herself,
          the little flea is weeping,
          the little door is creaking,
          the little broom is sweeping,
          the little cart is running,
          the little ash-heap is burning.
At this the girl said, then I will break my little water-pitcher.
And she broke her little water-pitcher.  Then said the little
spring from which ran the water, girl, why are you breaking your
water-pitcher.  Have I not reason to break my water-pitcher.
          The little louse has burnt herself,
          the little flea is weeping,
          the little door is creaking,
          the little broom is sweeping,
          the little cart is running,
          the little ash-heap is burning,
          the little tree is shaking itself.
Oh, ho, said the spring, then I will begin to flow, and began
to flow violently.  And in the water everything was drowned,
the girl, the little tree, the little ash-heap, the little
cart, the broom, the little door, the little flea, the little
louse, all together.
One very fine day it came to pass that the good God wished to enjoy
himself in the heavenly garden, and took all the apostles and saints
with him, so that no one stayed in heaven but saint peter.  The Lord
had commanded him to let no one in during his absence, so peter
stood by the door and kept watch.
Before long someone knocked.  Peter asked who was there, and what
he wanted.  I am a poor, honest tailor who prays for admission,
replied a smooth voice.  Honest indeed, said peter, like the thief
on the gallows.  You have been light-fingered and have snipped
folks, clothes away.  You will not get into heaven.  The Lord has
forbidden me to let anyone in while he is out.  Come, do be
merciful, cried the tailor.  Little scraps which fall off the table
of their own accord are not stolen, and are not worth speaking
about.  Look, I am lame, and have blisters on my feet from walking
here, I cannot possibly turn back again.  Just let me in, and I will
do all the dirty work.  I will carry the children, and wash their
clothes, and scrub and clean the benches on which they have been
playing, and patch all their torn frocks.  Saint peter let himself
be moved by pity, and opened the door of heaven just wide enough for
the lame tailor to slip his lean body in.  He was forced to sit down
in a corner behind the door, and told to stay quietly and peaceably
there, in order that the Lord, when he returned, might not observe
him and be angry.  The tailor obeyed, but once when saint peter went
outside the door, he got up, and full of curiosity, peeped into
every corner of heaven, and inspected the arrangement of the whole
place.  At length he came to a spot where many beautiful and
precious chairs were standing, and in the midst was a seat all of
gold which was set with shining jewels.  Likewise it was much higher
than the other chairs, and a footstool of gold was before it.  It
was the seat, however, on which the Lord sat when he was at home,
and from which he could see all that happened on earth.  The tailor
stood still, and looked at the seat for a long time, for it pleased
him better than all else.  At last he could master his curiosity no
longer, and climbed up and seated himself in the chair.  Then he saw
everything which was happening on earth, and observed an ugly old
woman who was standing washing by the side of a stream, secretly
laying two veils on one side for herself.  The sight of this
made the tailor so angry that he laid hold of the golden footstool,
and threw it down to earth through heaven, at the old thief.  But
since he could not bring the stool back again, he slipped quietly
out of the chair, seated himself in his place behind the door, and
behaved as if he had never stirred from the spot.
When the Lord and master returned again with his heavenly
companions,
he did not see the tailor behind the door, but when he seated
himself on his chair the footstool was missing.  He asked saint
peter what had become of the stool, but he did not know.  Then he
asked if he had let anyone come in.  I know of no one who has been
here, answered peter, but a lame tailor, who is still
sitting behind the door.  Then the Lord had the tailor brought
before him, and asked him if he had taken away the stool, and where
he had put it.  Oh, Lord, answered the tailor joyously, I threw it
in my anger down to earth at an old woman whom I saw stealing two
veils at the washing.  Oh, you knave, said the Lord, were I to
judge as you judge, how do you think you could have escaped so long.
I should long ago have had no chairs, benches, seats, nay, not even
an oven-fork, but should have thrown everything down at the sinners.
Henceforth you can stay no longer in heaven, but must go outside the
door again.  Then go where you will.  No one shall give punishment
here, but I alone, the Lord.
Peter was obliged to take the tailor out of heaven again, and as
he had torn shoes, and feet covered with blisters, he took a stick
in his hand, and went to wait-a-while, where the good soldiers sit
and make merry.
There was once upon a time an old fox with nine tails, who
believed that his wife was not faithful to him, and wished to
put her to the test.  He stretched himself out under the bench,
did not move a limb, and behaved as if he were stone dead.
Mrs. Fox went up to her room, shut herself in, and her maid, miss
cat, sat by the fire, and did the cooking.  When it became known
that the old fox was dead, suitors presented themselves.  The
maid heard someone standing at the house-door, knocking.  She
went and opened it, and it was a young fox, who said,
     what may you be about, miss cat.
     Do you sleep or do you wake.
She answered,
     I am not sleeping, I am waking,
     would you know what I am making.
     I am boiling warm beer with butter,
     will you be my guest for supper.
No, thank you, miss, said the fox, what is mrs. Fox doing.
The maid replied,
     she is sitting in her room,
     moaning in her gloom,
     weeping her little eyes quite red,
     because old mr. Fox is dead.
Do just tell her, miss, that a young fox is here, who would like
to woo her.  Certainly, young  sir.
     The cat goes up the stairs trip, trap,
     the door she knocks at tap, tap, tap,
     mistress fox, are you inside.
     Oh, yes, my little cat, she cried.
     A wooer he stands at the door out there.
     What does he look like, my dear.
Has he nine as beautiful tails as the late mr. Fox.  Oh, no,
answered the cat, he has only one.  Then I will not have him.
Miss cat went downstairs and sent the wooer away.  Soon afterwards
there was another knock, and another fox was at the door who
wished to woo mrs. Fox.  He had two tails, but he did not fare
better than the first.  After this still more came, each with one
tail more than the other, but they were all turned away, until
at last one came who had nine tails, like old mr. Fox.  When the
widow heard that, she said joyfully to the cat,
     now open the gates and doors all wide,
     and carry old mr. Fox outside.
But just as the wedding was going to be solemnized, old mr. Fox
stirred under the bench, and cudgeled all the rabble, and drove
them and mrs. Fox out of the house.
When old mr. Fox was dead, the wolf came as a suitor, and knocked
at the door, and the cat who was servant to mrs. Fox, opened it
for him.  The wolf greeted her and said,
     good day, mrs. Cat of kehrewit,
     how comes it that alone you sit.
     What are you making good.
The cat replied,
     in milk I'm breaking bread so sweet,
     will you be my guest, and eat.
No, thank you, mrs. Cat, answered the wolf.  Is mrs. Fox not
at home.
The cat said,
     she sits upstairs in her room,
     bewailing her sorrowful doom,
     bewailing her trouble so sore,
     for old mr. Fox is no more.
The wolf answered,
     if she's in want of a husband now,
     then will it please her to step below.
     The cat runs quickly up the stair,
     and lets her tail fly here and there,
     until she comes to the parlor door.
     With her five gold rings at the door she knocks,
     are you within, good mistress fox.
     If you're in want of a husband now,
     then will it please you to step below.
Mrs. Fox asked, has the gentleman red stockings on, and has he a
pointed mouth.  No, answered the cat.  Then he won't do for me.
When the wolf was gone, came a dog, a stag, a hare, a bear, a lion,
and all the beasts of the forest, one after the other.  But one
of the good qualities which old mr. Fox had possessed, was always
lacking, and the cat had continually to send the suitors away.
At length came a young fox.  Then mrs. Fox said, has the
gentleman red stockings on, and has he a little pointed mouth.
Yes, said the cat, he has.  Then let him come upstairs, said
mrs. Fox, and ordered the servant to prepare the wedding feast.
     Sweep me the room as clean as you can,
     up with the window, fling out my old man.
     For many a fine fat mouse he brought,
     yet of his wife he never thought,
     but ate up every one he caught.
Then the wedding was solemnized with young mr. Fox, and there was
much rejoicing and dancing, and if they have not left off, they
are dancing still.
A shoemaker, by no fault of his own, had become so poor that at
last he had nothing left but leather for one pair of shoes.  So in
the evening, he cut out the shoes which he wished to begin to
make the next morning, and as he had a good conscience, he lay
down quietly in his bed, commended himself to God, and fell
asleep.  In the morning, after he had said his prayers, and was
just going to sit down to work, the two shoes stood quite finished
on his table.  He was astounded, and knew not what to think.  He
took the shoes in his hands to observe them closer, and they were
so neatly made, with not one bad stitch in them, that it was just
as if they were intended as a masterpiece.  Before long, a buyer
came in, and as the shoes pleased him so well, he paid more for
them than was customary, and, with the money, the shoemaker was
able to purchase leather for two pairs of shoes.  He cut them out
at night, and next morning was about to set to work with fresh
courage, but he had no need to do so for, when he got up, they
were already made, and buyers also were not wanting, who gave
him money enough to buy leather for four pairs of shoes.  Again
the following morning he found the pairs made, and so it went on
constantly, what he cut out in the evening was finished by the
morning, so that he soon had his honest independence again, and
at last became a wealthy man.
Now it befell that one evening not long before christmas, when
the man had been cutting out, he said to his wife, before going to
bed, what think you if we were to stay up to-night to see who it
is that lends us this helping hand.  The woman liked the idea,
and lighted a candle, and then they hid themselves in a corner of
the room, behind some clothes which were hanging up there, and
watched.  When it was midnight, two pretty little naked men came,
sat down by the shoemaker's table, took all the work which was
cut out before them and began to stitch, and sew, and hammer so
skilfully and so quickly with their little fingers that the
shoemaker could not avert his eyes for astonishment.  They did
not stop until all was done, and stood finished on the table,
and they ran quickly away.
Next morning the woman said, the little men have made us rich,
and we really must show that we are grateful for it.  They run
about so, and have nothing on, and must be cold.  I'll tell you
what I'll do, I will make them little shirts, and coats, and
vests, and trousers, and knit both of them a pair of stockings,
and you make them two little pairs of shoes.  The man said, I shall
be very glad to do it.  And one night, when everything was ready,
they laid their presents all together on the table instead of
the cut-out work, and then concealed themselves to see how the
little men would behave.  At midnight they came bounding in, and
wanted to get to work at once, but as they did not find any
leather cut out, but only the pretty little articles of clothing,
they were at first astonished, and then they showed intense
delight.  They dressed themselves with the greatest rapidity, put
on the beautiful clothes, and sang,
     now we are boys so fine to see,
     why should we longer cobblers be.
Then they danced and skipped and leapt over chairs and benches.
At last they danced out of doors.  From that time forth they
came no more, but as long as the shoemaker lived all went well
with him, and all his efforts prospered.
There were once a cock and a hen who wanted to take a journey
together.  So the cock built a beautiful carriage, which had four
red wheels, and harnessed four mice to it.  The hen seated herself
in it with the cock, and they drove away together.  Not long
afterwards they met a cat who said, where are you going.  The
cock replied, we are going to the house of herr korbes.  Take me
with you, said the cat.  The cock answered, most willingly, get
up behind, lest you fall off in front.
Take great care not to dirty my little red wheels.  And you little
wheels, roll on, and you little mice pipe out, as we go forth on
our way to the house of herr korbes.
After this came a millstone, then an egg, then a duck, then a pin,
and at last a needle, who all seated themselves in the carriage,
and drove with them.  When they reached the house of herr korbes,
however, herr korbes was not there.  The mice drew the carriage
into the barn, the hen flew with the cock upon a perch.  The cat
sat down by the hearth, the duck on the well-pole.  The egg rolled
itself into a towel, the pin stuck itself into the chair-cushion,
the needle jumped on to the bed in the middle of the pillow, and
the millstone laid itself over the door.  Then herr korbes came
home, went to the hearth, and was about to light the fire, when
the cat threw a quantity of ashes in his face.  He ran into the
kitchen in a great hurry to wash it off, and the duck splashed some
water in his face.  He wanted to dry it with the towel, but the
egg rolled up against him, broke, and glued up his eyes.  He
wanted to rest, and sat down in the chair, and then the pin
pricked him.  He fell in a passion, and threw himself on his bed,
but as soon as he laid his head on the pillow, the needle pricked
him, so that he screamed aloud, and was just going to run out
into the wide world in his rage, but when he came to the
house-door, the millstone fell down and struck him dead.  Herr
korbes must have been a very wicked man.
A sheep-dog had not a good master, but, on the contrary, one who
let him suffer hunger.  As he could stay no longer with him, he
went quite sadly away.  On the road he met a sparrow who said,
brother dog, why are you so sad.  The dog replied, I am hungry,
and have nothing to eat.  Then said the sparrow, dear brother,
come into the town with me, and I will satisy your hunger.  So
they went into the town together, and when they came in front
of a butcher's shop the sparrow said to the dog, stay there, and
I will pick a bit of meat down for you, and he alighted on the
stall, looked about him to see that no one was observing him,
and pecked and pulled and tore so long at a piece which lay on
the edge, that it slipped down.  Then the dog seized it, ran into
a corner, and devoured it.  The sparrow said, now come with me
to another shop, and then I will get you one more piece that
you may be satisfied.  When the dog had devoured the second piece
as well, the sparrow asked, brother dog, have you now had enough.
Yes, I have had meat enough, he answered, but I have had no
bread yet.  Said the sparrow, you shall have that also, come
with me.  Then he took him to a baker's shop, and pecked at a
couple of little buns till they rolled down, and as the dog
wanted still more, he led him to another stall, and again got
bread for him.  When that was consumed, the sparrow said, brother
dog, have you now had enough.  Yes, he replied, now we will walk
awhile outside the town.
Then they both went out on to the highway.  The weather was warm,
however, and when they had walked a little way the dog said, I am
tired, and would like to sleep.  Well, do sleep, answered the
sparrow, and in the meantime I will seat myself on a branch.  So
the dog lay down on the road, and fell fast asleep.  Whilst he lay
sleeping there, a waggoner came driving by, who had a cart with
three horses, laden with two barrels of wine.  The sparrow,
however, saw that he was not going to turn aside, but was staying
in the wheel track in which the dog was lying, so it cried,
waggoner, don't do it, or I will make you poor.  But the
waggoner growled to himself, you will not make me poor, and
cracked his whip and drove the cart over the dog, and the wheels
killed him.  Then the sparrow cried, you have run over my brother
dog and killed him, it shall cost you your cart and horses.  Cart
and horses indeed, said the waggoner.  What harm can you do me.
And drove onwards.  Then the sparrow crept under the cover of the
cart, and pecked so long at the same bung-hole that he got the
bung out, and then all the wine ran out without the driver
noticing it.  But once when he was looking behind him he saw that
the cart was dripping, and looked at the barrels and saw that one
of them was empty.  Unfortunate fellow that am I, cried he.  Not
unfortunate enough yet, said the sparrow, and flew on to the head
of one of the horses and pecked his eyes out.  When the driver
saw that, he drew out his axe and wanted to hit the sparrow, but
the sparrow flew into the air, and he hit his horse on the head
and it fell down dead.  Oh, what an unfortunate man am I, cried
he.  Not unfortunate enough yet, said the sparrow, and when the
driver drove on with the two hoses, the sparrow again crept
under the cover, and pecked the bung out of the second cask, so
all the wine was spilt.  When the driver became aware of it, he
again cried, oh, what an unfortunate man am I.  But the sparrow
replied, not unfortunate enough yet, and seated himself on the
head of the second horse, and pecked his eyes out.  The driver
ran up to it and raised his axe to strike, but the sparrow flew
into the air and the blow struck the horse, which fell.  Oh, what
an unfortunate man am I.  Not unfortunate enough yet, said the
sparrow, and lighted on the third horse's head, and pecked out
his eyes.  The driver, in his rage, struck at the sparrow without
looking round, and did not hit him but killed his third horse
likewise.  Oh, what an unfortunate man am I, cried he.
Not unfortunate enough
yet, answered the sparrow.  Now will I make you unfortunate in
your home, and flew away.
The driver had to leave the waggon standing, and full of anger
and vexation went home.  Ah, said he to his wife, what misfortunes
I have had.  My wine has run out, and the horses are all three
dead.  Alas, husband, she answered, what a malicious bird has
come into the house.  It has gathered together every bird there
is in the world, and they have fallen on our corn up there, and
are devouring it.  Then he went upstairs, and thousands and
thousands of birds were sitting in the loft and had eaten up all
the corn, and the sparrow was sitting in the midst of them.
Then the driver cried, oh, what an unfortunate man am I.
Not unfortunate enough yet, answered the sparrow, waggoner, it
shall cost you your life as well, and flew out.
Then the waggoner had lost all his property, and he went
downstairs into the room, sat down behind the stove and was quite
furious and bitter.  But the sparrow sat outside in front of the
window, and cried, waggoner, it shall cost you your life.  Then
the waggoner snatched the axe and threw it at the sparrow, but it
only broke the window, and did not hit the bird.  The sparrow
now hopped in, placed itself on the stove and cried, waggoner, it
shall cost you your life.  The latter, quite mad and blind with
rage, smote the stove in twain, and as the sparrow flew from one
place to another so it fared with all his household furniture,
looking-glass, benches, table, and at last the walls of his house,
and yet he could not hit the bird.  At length, however, he caught
it with his hand.  Then his wife said, shall I kill it.  No, cried
he, that would be too merciful.  It shall die much more cruelly.
And he took it and swallowed it whole.  The sparrow, however,
began to flutter about in his body, and fluttered up again into
the man's mouth, then it stretched out its head, and cried,
waggoner, it shall still cost you your life.  The driver gave
the axe to his wife, and said, wife, kill the bird in my mouth
for me.  The woman struck, but missed her blow, and hit the
waggoner square on his head, so that he fell dead.  But the
sparrow flew up and away.
There was once upon a time a man who was called frederick
and a woman called catherine, who had married each other
and lived together as young married folks.  One day
frederick said, I will now go and plough, catherine, when
I come back, there must be some roast meat on the table for
hunger, and a fresh draught for thirst.  Just go, frederick,
answered kate, just go, I will have all ready for you.  So when
dinner-time drew near she got a sausage out of the chimney, put
it in the frying-pan, put some butter to it, and set it on the
fire.  The sausage began to fry and to hiss, catherine stood
beside it and held the handle of the pan, and had her own
thoughts as she was doing it.  Then it occurred to her, while
the sausage is getting done you could go into the cellar and draw
beer.  So she set the frying-pan safely on the fire, took a can,
and went down into the cellar to draw beer.  The beer ran
into the can and kate watched it, and then she thought, oh,
dear.  The dog upstairs is not fastened up, it might get the
sausage out of the pan.  Lucky I thought of it.  And in a trice
she was up the cellar-steps again, but the spitz had the sausage
in its mouth already, and trailed it away on the ground.  But
catherine, who was not idle, set out after it, and chased it a
long way into the field, the dog, however, was swifter than
catherine and did not let the sausage go, but skipped over
the furrows with it.  What's gone is gone, said kate, and
turned round, and as she had run till she was weary, she walked
quietly and comfortably, and cooled herself.  During this time
the beer was still running out of the cask, for kate had not
turned the tap.  And when the can was full and there was no
other place for it, it ran into the cellar and did not stop until
the whole cask was empty.  As soon as kate was on the steps she
saw the accident.  Good
gracious, she cried.  What shall I do now to stop frederick
finding out.  She thought for a while, and at last she remembered
that up in the garret was still standing a sack of the finest
wheat flour from the last fair, and she would fetch that down and
strew it over the beer.  Yes, said she, he who saves a thing
when he ought, has it afterwards when he needs it, and she climbed
up to the garret and carried the sack below, and threw it straight
down on the can of beer, which she knocked over, and frederick's
draught swam also in the cellar.  It is all right, said kate,
where the one is the other ought to be also, and she strewed
the meal over the whole cellar.  When it was done she was heartily
delighted with her work, and said, how clean and wholesome it does
look here.  At mid-day home came frederick, now, wife, what
have you ready for me.  Ah, freddy, she answered, I was frying
a sausage for you, but whilst I was drawing the beer to drink
with it, the dog took it away out of the pan, and whilst I was
running after the dog, all the beer ran out, and whilst I was
drying up the beer with the flour, I knocked over the can as
well, but be easy, the cellar is quite dry again.  Said
frederick, kate, kate, you should not have done that, to let
the sausage be carried off and the beer run out of the cask,
and throw out all our flour into the bargain.  Well, frederick,
I did not know that, you should have told me.  The man thought,
if this is the kind of wife I have, I had better take more care
of things.  Now he had saved up a good number of talers
which he changed into gold, and said to catherine, look,
these are yellow counters for playing games, I will put
them in a pot and bury them in the stable under the cow's manger,
but mind you keep away from them, or it will be the worse for
you.  Said she, oh, no, frederick, I certainly will not go
near them.  And when frederick was gone some pedlars came into
the village who had cheap earthen bowls and pots, and asked
the young woman if there was nothing she wanted to bargain with
them for.  Oh, dear people, said catherine, I have no money
and can buy nothing, but if you have any use for yellow
counters I will buy of you.  Yellow counters, why not.  But
just let us see them.  Then go into the stable and
dig under the cow's manger, and you will find the yellow
counters.  I am not allowed to go there.  The rogues went
thither, dug and found pure gold.  Then they laid hold of it,
ran away, and left their pots and bowls behind in the house.
Catherine though she must use her new things, and as she had
no lack in the kitchen already without these, she knocked the
bottom out of every pot, and set them all as ornaments on the
paling which went round about the house.  When frederick came
and saw the new decorations, he said, catherine, what have you
been about.  I have bought them, frederick, for the counters
which were under the cow's manger.  I did not go there myself,
the pedlars had to dig them out for themselves.  Ah, wife,
said frederick, what have you done.  Those were not counters,
but pure gold, and all our wealth, you should not have done that.
Indeed, frederick, said she, I did not know that, you should
have forewarned me.
Catherine stood for a while and wondered, then she said,
listen, frederick, we will soon get the gold back again, we
will run after the thieves.  Come, then, said frederick, we
will try it, but take with you some butter and cheese that we may
have something to eat on the way.  Yes, frederick, I will take
them.  They set out, and as frederick was the better walker,
catherine followed him.  It is to my advantage, thought she,
when we turn back I shall be a little way in advance.  Then
she came to a hill where there were deep ruts on both sides
of the road.  There one can see, said catherine, how they
have torn and skinned and galled the poor earth, it will never
be whole again as long as it lives, and in her heart's
compassion she took her butter and smeared the ruts right
and left, that they might not be so hurt by the wheels, and as
she was thus bending down in her charity, one of the cheeses
rolled out of her pocket down the hill.  Said catherine, I
have made my way once up here, I will not go down again, another
may run and fetch it back.  So she took another cheese and rolled
it down.  But the cheeses did not come back, so she let a third
run down, thinking.  Perhaps they are waiting for company, and
do not like to walk alone.  As all three stayed away she said,
I do not know what that
can mean, but it may perhaps be that the third has not found
the way, and has gone wrong, I will just send the fourth to
call it.  But the fourth did no better than the third.  Then
catherine was angry, and threw down the fifth and sixth as
well, and these were her last.  She remained standing for some
time watching for their coming, but when they still did not come,
she said, oh, you are good folks to send in search of death,
you stay a fine long time away.  Do you think I will wait any
longer for you.  I shall go my way, you may run after me,
you have younger legs than I.  Catherine went on and found
frederick, who was standing waiting for her because he wanted
something to eat.  Now just let us have what you have brought
with you, said he.  She gave him the dry bread.  Where have
you the butter and the cheeses, asked the man.  Ah, freddy,
said catherine, I smeared the cart-ruts with the butter and
the cheeses will come soon, one ran away from me, so I sent
the others after to call it.  Said frederick, you should not
have done that, catherine, to smear the butter on the road,
and let the cheeses run down the hill.  Really, frederick,
you should have told me.
Then they ate the dry bread together, and frederick said,
catherine, did you make the house safe when you came away.
No, frederick, you should have told me to do it before.  Then
go home again, and make the house safe before we go any farther,
and bring with you something else to eat.  I will wait here
for you.  Catherine went back and thought, frederick wants
something more to eat, he does not like butter and cheese, so I
will take with me a handkerchief full of dried pears and
a pitcher of vinegar for him to drink.  Then she bolted the
upper half of the door fast, but unhinged the lower door, and
took it on her back, believing that when she had placed the
door in security the house must be well taken care of.  Catherine
took her time on the way, and thought, frederick will rest
himself so much the longer.  When she had once reached him she
said, here is the house-door for you, frederick, and now you
can take care of the house yourself.  Oh, heavens, said he, what
a wise wife I have.  She takes the under-door
off the hinges that everything may run in, and bolts the
upper one.  It is now too late to go back home again, but
since you have brought the door here, you shall just carry it
farther.  I will carry the door, frederick, but the dried pears
and the vinegar-jug will be too heavy for me, I will hang them
on the door, it may carry them.
And now they went into the forest, and sought the rogues, but
did not find them.  At length as it grew dark they climbed into
a tree and resolved to spend the night there.  Scarcely, however,
had they sat down at the top of it than the rascals came thither
who carry away with them what does not want to go, and find
things before they are lost.  They sat down under the very tree
in which frederick and catherine were sitting, lighted a fire,
and were about to share their booty.  Frederick got down on the
other side and collected
some stones together.  Then he climbed up again with them, and
wished to throw them at the thieves and kill them.  The stones,
however, did not hit them, and the knaves cried, it will soon
be morning, the wind is shaking down the fir-cones.  Catherine
still had the door on her back, and as it pressed so heavily on
her, she thought it was the fault of the dried pears, and said,
frederick, I must throw the pears down.  No, catherine, not now,
he replied, they might betray us.  Oh, but, frederick, I must.
They weigh me down far too much.  Do it, then, and be hanged.
Then the dried pears rolled down between the branches, and the
rascals below said, those are birds, droppings.
A short time afterwards, as the door was still heavy, catherine
said, ah, frederick, I must pour out the vinegar.  No, catherine,
you must not, it might betray us.  Ah, but, frederick, I must,
it weighs me down far too much.  Then do it and be hanged.
So she emptied out the vinegar, and it spattered over the
robbers.  They said amongst themselves, the dew is already
falling.  At length catherine thought, can it really be the
door which weighs me down so, and said, frederick, I must
throw the door down.  No, not now, catherine, it might betray us.
Oh, but, frederick, I must.  It weighs me down far too much.  Oh,
no, catherine, do hold it fast.  Ah, frederick, I am letting it
fall.  Let it go, then, in the devil's name.  Then it fell down
with a violent clatter, and the rascals below cried, the devil is
coming down the tree, and they ran away and left everything behind
them.  Early next morning, when the two came down they found all
their gold again, and carried it home.
When they were once more at home, frederick said, and now,
catherine, you, too, must be industrious and work.  Yes,
frederick, I will soon do that, I will go into the field and
cut corn.  When catherine got into the field, she said to
herself, shall I eat before I cut, or shall I sleep before I
cut.  Oh, I will eat first.  Then catherine ate and eating made
her sleepy, and she began to cut, and half in a dream cut all her
clothes to pieces, her apron, her gown, and her shift.  When
catherine awoke again after a long sleep she was standing
there half-naked, and said to herself, is it I, or is it not
I.  Alas, it is not I.  In the meantime night came, and catherine
ran into the village, knocked at her husband's window, and cried,
frederick.
What is the matter.  I should very much like to know if catherine
is in.  Yes, yes, replied frederick, she must be in and asleep.
Said she, that's all right, then I am certainly at home already,
and ran away.
Outside catherine found some vagabonds who were going to steal.
Then she went to them and said, I will help you to steal.  The
rascals thought that she knew what opportunities the place
offered, and were willing.  Catherine went in front of the houses,
and cried, good folks, have you anything.  We want to steal.
The thieves thought to themselves, that's a fine way of doing
things, and wished themselves once more rid of catherine.  Then
they said to her, outside the village the pastor has some turnips
in the field.  Go there and pull up some turnips for us.
Catherine went to the ground, and began to pull them up, but
was so lazy that she never stood up straight.  Then a man came
by, saw her, and stood still and thought that it was the devil
who was thus rooting amongst the turnips.  He ran away into the
village to the pastor, and said, mr. Pastor, the devil is in
your turnip-ground, rooting up turnips.  Ah, heavens, answered
the pastor, I have a lame foot, I cannot go out and drive him
away.  Said the man, then I will carry you on my back, and he
carried him out on his back.  And when they came to the ground,
catherine arose and stood up her full height.  Ah, the devil,
cried the pastor, and both hurried away, and in his great
fright the pastor could run better with his lame foot than the
man who had carried him on his back could do on his sound legs.
There was a certain village wherein no one lived but really rich
peasants, and just one poor one, whom they called the little
peasant.  He had not even so much as a cow, and still less money
to buy one, and yet he and his wife did so wish to have one.  One
day he said to her, listen, I have a good idea, there is our
gossip the carpenter, he shall make us a wooden calf, and paint it
brown, so that it looks like any other, and in time it will
certainly get big and be a cow.  The woman also liked the idea, and
their gossip the carpenter cut and planed the calf, and painted
it as it ought to be, and made it with its head hanging down as
if it were eating.
Next morning when the cows were being driven out, the little
peasant called the cow-herd and said, look, I have a little calf
there, but it is still small and has to be carried.  The cow-herd
said, all right, and took it in his arms and carried it to the
pasture, and set it among the grass.  The little calf always
remained standing like one which was eating, and the cow-herd said,
it will soon run by itself, just look how it eats already.  At
night when he was going to drive the herd home again, he said to
the calf, if you can stand there and eat your fill, you can also
go on your four legs.  I don't care to drag you home again in
my arms.  But the little peasant stood at his door, and waited for
his little calf, and when the cow-herd drove the cows through
the village, and the calf was
missing, he inquired where it was.  The cow-herd answered, it is
still standing out there eating.  It would not stop and come
with us.  But the little peasant said, oh, but I must have my
beast back again.  Then they went back to the meadow together,
but someone had stolen the calf, and it was gone.  The cow-herd
said, it must have run away.  The peasant, however, said, don't
tell me that, and led the cow-herd before the mayor, who for his
carelessness condemned him to give the peasant a cow for the
calf which had run away.
And now the little peasant and his wife had the cow for which
they had so long wished, and they were heartily glad, but they
had no food for it, and could give it nothing to eat, so it
soon had to be killed.  They salted the flesh, and the peasant went
into the town and wanted to sell the skin there, so that he might
buy a new calf with the proceeds.  On the way he passed by a mill,
and there sat a raven with broken wings, and out of pity he took
him and wrapped him in the skin.  But as the weather grew so
bad and there was a storm of rain and wind, he could go no farther,
and turned back to the mill and begged for shelter.  The miller's
wife was alone in the house, and said to the peasant, lay yourself
on the straw there, and gave him a slice of bread and cheese.  The
peasant ate it, and lay down with his skin beside him, and the
woman thought, he is tired and has gone to sleep.  In the
meantime came the parson.  The miller's wife received him well,
and said, my husband is out, so we will have a feast.  The
peasant listened, and when he heard them talk about feasting
he was vexed that he had been forced to make shift with a slice
of bread and cheese.  Then the woman served up four different
things, roast meat, salad, cakes, and wine.
Just as they were about to sit down and eat, there was a knocking
outside.  The woman said, oh, heavens.  It is my husband.  She
quickly hid the roast meat inside the tiled stove, the wine
under the pillow, the salad on the bed, the cakes under it, and
the parson in the closet on the porch.  Then she opened the
door for her husband, and said, thank heaven, you are back
again.  There is such a storm, it looks as if the world were
coming to an end.  The miller
saw the peasant lying on the straw, and asked, what is that
fellow doing there.  Ah, said the wife, the poor knave came in
the storm and rain, and begged for shelter, so I gave him a bit
of bread and cheese, and showed him where the straw was.  The man
said, I have no objection, but be quick and get me something to
eat.  The woman said, but I have nothing but bread and cheese.  I
am contented with anything, replied the husband, so far as I am
concerned, bread and cheese will do, and looked at the peasant
and said, come and eat some more with me.  The peasant did not
require to be invited twice, but got up and ate.  After this the
miller saw the skin in which the raven was, lying on the ground,
and asked, what have you there.  The peasant answered, I have a
soothsayer inside it.  Can he foretell anything to me, said the
miller.  Why not, answered the peasant, but he only says four
things, and the fifth he keeps to himself.  The miller was curious,
and said, let him foretell something for once.  Then the peasant
pinched the raven's head, so that he croaked and made a noise
like krr, krr.  The miller said, what did he say.  The peasant
answered, in the first place, he says that there is some wine
hidden under the pillow.  Bless me, cried the miller, and went
there and found the wine.  Now go on, said he.  The peasant
made the raven croak again, and said, in the second place, he
says that there is some roast meat in the tiled stove.  Upon my
word, cried the miller, and went thither, and found the roast
meat.  The peasant made the raven prophesy still more, and said,
thirdly, he says that there is some salad on the bed.  That
would be a fine thing, cried the miller, and went there and found
the salad.  At last the peasant pinched the raven once more till
he croaked, and said, fourthly, he says that there are some
cakes under the bed.  That would be a fine thing, cried the
miller, and looked there, and found the cakes.
And now the two sat down to the table together, but the miller's
wife was frightened to death, and went to bed and took all the
keys with her.  The miller would have liked much to know the
fifth, but the little peasant said, first, we will quickly
eat the four things, for the fifth is something bad.  So they
ate, and after that they
bargained how much the miller was to give for the fifth prophesy,
until they agreed on three hundred talers.  Then the peasant
once more pinched the raven's head till he croaked loudly.  The
miller asked, what did he say.  The peasant replied, he says that
the devil is hiding outside there in the closet on the porch.
The miller said, the devil must go out, and opened the house-door.
Then the woman was forced to give up the keys, and the peasant
unlocked the closet.  The parson ran out as fast as he could, and
the miller said, it was true.  I saw the black rascal with my own
eyes.  The peasant, however, made off next morning by daybreak
with the three hundred talers.
At home the small peasant gradually launched out.  He built a
beautiful house, and the peasants said, the small peasant has
certainly been to the place where golden snow falls, and people
carry the gold home in shovels.  Then the small peasant was
brought before the mayor, and bidden to say from whence his
wealth came.  He answered, I sold my cow's skin in the town, for
three hundred talers.  When the peasants heard that, they too
wished to enjoy this great profit, and ran home, killed all their
cows, and stripped off their skins in order to sell them in the
town to the greatest advantage.  The mayor, however, said, but
my servant must go first.  When she came to the merchant in the
town, he did not give her more than two talers for a skin, and
when the others came, he did not give them so much, and said,
what can I do with all these skins.
Then the peasants were vexed that the small peasant should have
thus outwitted them, wanted to take vengeance on him, and accused
him of this treachery before the mayor.  The innocent little
peasant was unanimously sentenced to death, and was to be rolled
into the water, in a barrel pierced full of holes.  He was led
forth, and a priest was brought who was to say a mass for his
soul.  The others were all obliged to retire to a distance, and
when the peasant looked at the priest, he recognized the man who
had been with the miller's wife.  He said to him, I set you free
from the closet, set me free from the barrel.  At this same
moment up came, with a flock of sheep, the very shepherd whom
the peasant knew had long been wishing to be mayor, so he cried
with all his might, no, I will not do it.  If the whole world
insists on it, I will not do it.  The shepherd hearing that,
came up to him, and asked, what are you about.  What is it that
you will not do.  The peasant said, they want to make me mayor,
if I will but put myself in the barrel, but I will not do it.
The shepherd said, if nothing more than that is needful in order
to be mayor, I would get into the barrel at once.  The peasant
said, if you will get in, you will be mayor.  The shepherd was
willing, and got in, and the peasant shut the top down on him.
Then he took the shepherd's flock for himself, and drove it away.
The parson went to the crowd, and declared that the mass had
been said.  Then they came and rolled the barrel towards the
water.  When the barrel began to roll, the shepherd cried, I am
quite willing to be mayor.  They believed no otherwise than that
it was the peasant who was saying this, and answered, that is
what we intend, but first you shall look about you a little
down below there, and they rolled the barrel down into the water.
After that the peasants went home, and as they were entering
the village, the small peasant also came quietly in, driving a
flock of sheep and looking quite contented.  Then the peasants
were astonished, and said, peasant, from whence do you come.
Have you come out of the water.  Yes, truly, replied the
peasant, I sank deep, deep down, until at last I got to the bottom.
I pushed the bottom out of the barrel, and crept out, and there
were pretty meadows
on which a number of lambs were feeding, and from thence I
brought this flock away with me.  Said the peasants, are there
any more.  Oh, yes, said he, more than I could want.  Then
the peasants made up their minds that they too would fetch some
sheep for themselves, a flock apiece, but the mayor said, I
come first.  So they went to the water together, and just then
there were some of the small fleecy clouds in the blue sky, which
are called little lambs, and they were reflected in the water,
whereupon the peasants cried, we already see the sheep down
below.  The mayor pressed forward and said, I will go down first,
and look about me, and if things promise well I'll call you.
So he jumped in.  Splash, went the water.  It sounded as if
he were calling them, and the whole crowd plunged in after
him as one man.  Then the entire village was dead, and the
small peasant, as sole heir, became a rich man.
There was once an old castle in the midst of a large and dense
forest, and in it an old woman who was a witch dwelt all
alone.  In the day-time she changed herself into a car or a
screech-owl, but in the evening she took her proper shape
again as a human being.  She could lure wild beasts and birds
to her, and then she killed and boiled and roasted them.  If
anyone came within one hundred paces of the castle he was
obliged to stand still, and could not stir from the place until
she bade him be free.  But whenever an innocent maiden came
within this circle, she changed her into a bird, and shut her
up in a wicker-work cage, and carried the cage into a room in the
castle.  She had about seven thousand cages of rare birds in
the castle.
Now, there was once a maiden who was called jorinda, who was
fairer than all other girls.  She and a handsome youth named
joringel had promised to marry each other.  They were still in
the days of betrothal, and their greatest happiness was being
together.  One day in order that they might be able to talk
together in peace they went for a walk in the forest.  Take
care, said joringel, that you do not go too near the castle.
It was a beautiful evening.  The sun shone brightly between
the trunks of the trees into the dark green of the forest, and
the turtle-doves sang mournfully upon the beech trees.
Jorinda wept now and then.  She sat down in the sunshine and
was sorrowful.  Joringel was sorrowful too.  They were as
sad as if they were about to die.  Then they looked around them,
and were quite at a loss, for they did not know by which way
they should go home.  The sun was still half above the
mountain and half under.
Joringel looked through the bushes, and saw the old walls of the
castle close at hand.  He was horror-stricken and filled with
deadly fear.  Jorinda was singing,
          my little bird, with the necklace red,
          sings sorrow, sorrow, sorrow,
          he sings that the dove must soon be dead,
          sings sorrow, sor - jug, jug, jug.
Joringel looked for jorinda.  She was changed into a nightingale,
and sang, jug, jug, jug.  A screech-owl with glowing eyes
flew three times round about her, and three times cried, to-whoo,
to-whoo, to-whoo.
Joringel could not move.  He stood there like a stone, and
could neither weep nor speak, nor move hand or foot.
The sun had now set.  The owl flew into the thicket, and directly
afterwards there came out of it a crooked old woman, yellow
and lean, with large red eyes and a hooked nose, the point of
which reached to her chin.  She muttered to herself, caught the
nightingale, and took it away in her hand.
Joringel could neither speak nor move from the spot.  The
nightingale was gone.  At last the woman came back, and said
in a hollow voice, greet you, zachiel.  If the moon shines on
the cage, zachiel, let him loose at once.  Then joringel was
freed.  He fell on his knees before the woman and begged that
she would give him back his jorinda, but she said that he
should never have her again, and went away.  He called, he wept,
he lamented, but all in vain, hooh, what is to become of me.
Joringel went away, and at last came to a strange village, where
he kept sheep for a long time.  He often walked round and round
the castle, but not too near to it.  At last he dreamt one
night that he found a blood-red flower, in the middle of
which was a beautiful large pearl.  That he picked the flower
and went with it to the castle, and that everything he touched
with the flower was freed from enchantment.  He also dreamt
that by means of it he recovered his jorinda.
In the morning, when he awoke, he began to seek over hill and
dale for such a flower.  He sought until the ninth day, and then,
early in the morning, he found the blood-red flower.  In the
middle of it there was a large dew-drop, as big as the finest
pearl.
Day and night he journeyed with this flower to the castle.  When
he was within a hundred paces of it he was not held fast, but
walked on to the door.  Joringel was full of joy.  He touched the
door with the flower, and it sprang open.  He walked in through
the courtyard, and listened for the sound of the birds.  At
last he heard it.  He went on and found the room from whence it
came, and there the witch was feeding the birds in the seven
thousand cages.
When she saw joringel she was angry, very angry, and scolded
and spat poison and gall at him, but she could not come within
two paces of him.  He did not take any notice of her, but went
and looked at the cages with the birds.  But there were many
hundred nightingales, how was he to find his jorinda again.
Just then he saw the old woman quietly take away a cage with
a bird in it, and go towards the door.
Swiftly he sprang towards her, touched the cage with the flower,
and also the old woman.  She could now no longer bewitch anyone.
And jorinda was standing there, clasping him round the neck,
and she was as beautiful as ever.  Then all the other birds
were turned into maidens again, and he went home with his jorinda,
and they lived happily together for a long time.
Once upon a time the fox was talking to the wolf of the
strength of man.  How no animal could withstand him, and how
all were obliged to emply cunning in order to protect themselves
from him.  Then the wolf answered, if I had but the chance of
seeing a man for once, I would set on him notwithstanding.
I can help you to do that, said the fox.  Come to me early
to-morrow morning, and I will show you one.  The wolf presented
himself betimes, and the fox took him out on the road by which
the huntsmen went daily.  First came an old discharged soldier.
Is that a man, inquired the wolf.  No, answered the fox, that
was one.  Afterwards came a little boy who was going to school.
Is that a man.  No, that will be one.  At length came a
hunter with his double-barelled gun at his back, and hanger by
his side.  Said the fox to the wolf, look, there comes a man,
you must attack him, but I will take myself off to my hole.  The
wolf then rushed on the man.  When the huntsman saw him he
said, it is a pity that I have not loaded with a bullet, aimed,
and fired his small shot in his face.  The wolf pulled a very
wry grimace, but did not let himself be frightened, and attacked
him again, on which the huntsman gave him the second barrel.  The
wolf swallowed his pain, and rushed on the huntsman, but he
drew out his bright hanger, and gave him a few cuts with it
right and left, so that, bleeding everywhere, he ran howling back
to the fox.  Well, brother wolf, said the fox, how have you
got on with man.  Ah, replied the wolf, I never imagined the
strength of man to be what it is.  First, he took a stick from
his shoulder, and blew into it, and then something flew into
my face which tickled me terribly.  Then he breathed once
more into the stick, and it flew into my nose like lightning and
hail.  When I was quite close, he drew a white rib out of his
body, and he beat me so with it that I was all but left lying
dead.  See what a braggart you are, said the fox.  You throw
your hatchet so far that you cannot fetch it back again.
The wolf had the fox with him, and whatsoever the wolf
wished, that the fox was compelled to do, for he was the
weaker, and he would gladly have been rid of his master.
It chanced that once as they were going through the forest, the wolf
said, red-fox, get me something to eat, or else I will eat
you yourself.  Then the fox answered, I know a farm-yard where
there are two young lambs.  If you are inclined, we will fetch one
of them.  That suited the wolf, and they went thither, and the fox
stole the little lamb, took it to the wolf, and went away.  The
wolf devoured it, but was not satisfied with one.  He wanted the
other as well, and went to get it.  But as he did it so clumsily,
the mother of the little lamb heard him, and began to cry out
terribly, and to bleat so that the farmers came running there.
They found the wolf, and beat him so mercilessly, that he went
to the fox limping and howling.  You have misled me finely, said
he.  I wanted to fetch the other lamb, and the country folks
surprised me, and have beaten me to a jelly.  The fox replied,
why are you such a glutton.
Next day they again went into the country, and the greedy wolf
once more said, red-fox, get me something to eat, or I will
eat you yourself.  Then answered the fox, I know a farm-house
where the wife is baking pancakes to-night.  We will get some
of them for ourselves.  They went there, and the fox slipped
round the house, and peeped and sniffed about until he discovered
where the dish was, and then snatched six pancakes and carried
them to the wolf.
There is something for you to eat, said he to him, and then went
his way.  The wolf swallowed down the pancakes in an instant,
and said, they make one want more, and went thither and tore the
whole dish down so that it broke in pieces.  This made such
a great noise that the woman came out, and when she saw the
wolf she called the people, who hurried there, and beat him as
long as their sticks would hold together, till with two lame
legs, and howling loudly, he returned to the fox in the forest.
How abominably you have misled me, cried he, the peasants caught
me, and tanned my skin for me.  But the fox replied, why are
you such a glutton.
On the third day, when they were out together, and the wolf
could only limp along painfully, he again said, red-fox, get me
something to eat, or I will eat your yourself.  The fox
answered, I
know a man who has been killing, and the salted meat is lying
in a barrel in the cellar.  We will get that.  Said the wolf, I
will go when you do, that you may help me if I am not able to
get away.  I am willing, said the fox, and showed him the by-paths
and ways by which at length they reached the cellar.  There was
meat in abundance, and the wolf attacked it instantly and thought,
there is plenty of time before I need leave off.  The fox liked
it also, but looked about everywhere, and often ran to the hole
by which they had come in, to find out if his body was still
thin enough to slip through it.  The wolf said, dear fox, tell
me why you are running here and there so much, and jumping in
and out.
I must see that no one is coming, replied the crafty fellow.
Don't eat too much.  Then said the wolf, I shall not leave until
the barrel is empty.  In the meantime the farmer, who had heard
the noise of the fox's jumping, came into the cellar.  When the
fox saw him he was out of the hole at one bound.  The wolf
wanted to follow him, but he had made himself so fat with
eating that he could no longer get through, but stuck fast.  Then
came the farmer with a cudgel and struck him dead, but the fox
bounded into the forest, glad to be rid of the old glutton.
It happened that the cat met the fox in a forest, and as she
thought to herself, he is clever and full of experience, and
much esteemed in the world, she spoke to him in a friendly
way.  Good-day, dear mr. Fox, how are you.  How is all with
you.  How are you getting on in these hard times.  The fox,
full of all kinds of arrogance, looked at the cat from head
to foot, and for a long time
did not know whether he would give any answer or not.  At last
he said, oh, you wretched beard-cleaner, you piebald fool, you
hungry mouse-hunter, what can you be thinking of.  Have you the
cheek to ask how I am getting on.  What have you learnt.  How
many arts do you understand.  I understand but one, replied
the cat, modestly.  What art is that, asked the fox.  When
the hounds are following me, I can spring into a tree and
save myself.  Is that all, said the fox.  I am master of a
hundred arts, and have into the bargain a sackful of cunning.
You make me sorry for you.  Come with me, I will teach you
how people get away from the hounds.  Just then came a hunter
with four dogs.  The cat sprang nimbly up a tree, and sat
down on top of it, where the branches and foliage quite
concealed her.  Open your sack, mr. Fox, open your sack, cried
the cat to him, but the dogs had already seized him, and
were holding him fast.  Ah, mr. Fox, cried the cat.  You with
your hundred arts are left in the lurch.  Had you been able
to climb like me, you would not have lost your life.
There was once a cook named Gretel, who wore shoes with
red heels, and when she walked out with them on, she
turned herself this way and that, was quite happy and
thought, you certainly are a pretty girl.  And when she
came home she drank, in her gladness of heart, a draught of
wine, and
as wine excites a desire to eat, she tasted the best of whatever
she was cooking until she was satisfied, and said, the cook
must know what the food is like.
It came to pass that the master one day said to her, Gretel,
there is a guest coming this evening.  Prepare me two fowls
very daintily.  I will see to it, master, answered Gretel.
She killed two fowls, scalded them, plucked them, put them on
the spit, and towards evening set them before the fire, that
they might roast.  The fowls began to turn brown, and were
nearly ready, but the guest had not yet arrived.  Then Gretel
called out to her master, if the guest does not come, I must
take the fowls away from the fire, but it will be a sin and a
shame if they are not eaten the moment they are at their
juiciest.  The master said, I will run myself, and fetch
the guest.  When the master had turned his back, Gretel laid
the spit with the fowls on one side, and thought, standing
so long by the fire there, makes one sweat and thirsty.  Who
knows when they will come.  Meanwhile, I will run into the
cellar, and take a drink.  She ran down, set a jug, said,
God bless it for you, Gretel, and took a good drink, and
thought that wine should flow on, and should not be interrupted,
and took yet another hearty draught.
Then she went and put the fowls down again to the fire, basted
them, and drove the spit merrily round.  But as the roast
meat smelt so good, Gretel thought, something must be wrong,
it ought to be tasted.  She touched it with her finger, and
said, ah, how good fowls are.  It certainly is a sin and a
shame that they are not eaten
at the right time.  She ran to the window, to see if the
master was not coming with his guest, but she saw no one, and
went back to the fowls and thought, one of the wings is burning.
I had better take it off and eat it.  So she cut it off, ate it,
and enjoyed it, and when she had done, she thought, the other
must go down too, or else master will observe that something is
missing.  When the two wings were eaten, she went and looked
for her master, and did not see him.  It suddenly occurred to
her, who knows.  They are perhaps not coming at all, and have
turned in somewhere.  Then she said, well, Gretel, enjoy
yourself, one fowl has been cut into, take another drink, and
eat it up entirely.  When it is eaten you will have some peace,
why should God's good gifts be spoilt.  So she ran
into the cellar again, took an enormous drink and ate up the
one chicken in great glee.  When one of the chickens was
swallowed down, and still her master did not come, Gretel
looked at the other and said, where one is, the other should
be likewise, the two go together.  What's right for the one is
right for the other.  I think if I were to take another
draught it would do me no harm.  So she took another hearty
drink, and let the second chicken follow the first.
While she was making the most of it, her master came and cried,
hurry up, Gretel, the guest is coming directly after me.  Yes,
sir, I will soon serve up, answered Gretel.  Meantime the master
looked to see that the table was properly laid, and took the
great knife, wherewith he was going to carve the chickens, and
sharpened it on the steps.  Presently the guest came, and
knocked politely and courteously at the house-door.  Gretel ran,
and looked to see who was there, and when she saw the guest,
she put her finger to her lips and said, hush. Hush.  Go away
as quickly as you can, if my master catches you it will be the
worse for you.  He certainly did ask you to supper, but his
intention is to cut off your two ears.  Just listen how he
is sharpening the knife for it.  The guest heard the sharpening, and
hurried down the steps again as fast as he could.  Gretel was
not idle.  She ran screaming to her master, and cried, you have
invited a fine guest.  Why, Gretel, what do you mean by that.
Yes, said she, he has taken the chickens which I was just
going to serve
up, off the dish, and has run away with them.  That's a nice
trick, said her master, and lamented the fine chickens.  If
he had but left me one, so that something remained for me to
eat.  He called to him to stop, but the guest pretended not to
hear.  Then he ran after him with the knife still in his hand,
crying, just one, just one, meaning that the guest should leave
him just one chicken, and not take both.  The guest, however,
thought no otherwise than that he was to give up one of his
ears, and ran as if fire were burning under him, in order to
take them both home with him.
Once upon a time the little hen went with the little cock
to the nut-hill, and they agreed together that whichsoever of
them found a kernel of a nut should share it with the other.
Then the hen found a large, large nut, but said nothing about
it, intending to eat the kernel herself.  The kernel, however,
was so large that she could not swallow it, and it remained
sticking in her throat, so that she was alarmed lest she should
be choked.  Then she cried, cock, I entreat you to run as fast
as you can and fetch me some water, or I shall choke.  The little
cock did run as fast as he could to the spring, and said, stream,
you are to give me some water, the little hen is lying on the
nut-hill, and she has swallowed a large nut, and is choking.  The
well answered, first run to the bride, and get her to give you
some red silk.  The little cock ran to the bride and said, bride,
you are to give me some red silk, I want to give red silk to the
well, the well is to give me some water, I am to take the water
to the little hen who is lying on the nut-hill and has
swallowed a great nut-kernel, and is choking with it.  The bride
answered, first run and bring me my little wreath which is
hanging to a willow.  So the little cock ran to the willow, and
drew the wreath from the branch and took it to the bride, and
the bride gave him some red silk for it, which he took to the
well, who gave him some water for it.  Then the little cock took
the water to the hen, but when he got there the hen had choked in
the meantime, and lay there dead and did not move.  Then the
cock was so distressed that he cried aloud, and every animal
came to lament the little hen, and six mice built a little
carriage to carry her to her grave, and when the carriage was
ready they harnessed themselves to it, and the cock drove.  On
the way, however, they met the fox, who said, where are you
going, little cock.  I am going to bury my little hen.  May
I drive with you.  Yes, but seat yourself at the back of the
carriage, for in the front my little horses could not drag you.
Then the procession went onwards, and they reached a stream.
How are we to cross over, said the little cock.  A straw was
lying by the stream and it said, I will lay myself straight
across, and then you
can drive over me.  But when the six mice came to the bridge,
the straw slipped and fell into the water, and the six mice
all fell in and were drowned.  Then they were again in difficulty,
and a coal came and said, I am large enough, I will lay myself
across, and you shall drive over me.  So the coal also laid
itself across the water, but unhappily just touched it, at which
the coal hissed, was extinguished and died.  When a stone saw
that, it took pity on the little cock, wished to help him, and
laid itself over the water.  Then the cock drew the carriage
himself, but when he got it over and reached the shore with the
dead hen, and was about to draw over the others who were sitting
behind as well, there were too many of them, the carriage ran
back, and they all fell into the water together, and were drowned.
Then the little cock was left alone with the dead hen, and dug a
grave for her and laid her in it, and made a mound above it, on
which he sat down and fretted until he died too, and then everyone
was dead.
Once upon a time there was a man who did nothing but gamble, and
for that reason people never called him anything but gambling
Hansel, and as he never ceased to gamble, he played away his house
and all that he had.  Now the very day before his creditors were
to take his house from him, came the Lord and St. Peter, and
asked him to give them shelter for the night.  Then gambling Hansel
said, for my part, you may stay the night, but I cannot give you
a bed or anything to eat.  So the Lord said he was just to take
them in, and they themselves would buy something to eat, to which
gambling Hansel made no objection.  Thereupon St. Peter gave him
three groschen, and said he was to go to the baker's and fetch
some bread.  So gambling Hansel went, but when he reached the house
where the other gambling vagabonds were gathered together, they,
although they had won all that he had, greeted him clamorously,
and said, Hansel, do come in.  Oh, said he, do you want to win
three groschen too.  On this they would not let him go.  So he
went in, and played away the three groschen also.  Meanwhile
St. Peter and the Lord were waiting, and as he was so long in
coming, they set out to meet him.  When gambling Hansel came,
however, he pretended that the money had fallen into the gutter,
and kept raking about in it all the while to find it, but
our Lord already
knew that he had lost it in play.  St. Peter again gave him
three groschen, and now he did not allow himself to be led away
once more, but fetched them the loaf.  Our Lord then inquired if
he had no wine, and he said, alack, sir, the casks are all empty.
But the Lord said he was to go down into the cellar, for the best
wine was still there.  For a long time he would not believe
this, but at length he said, well, I will go down, but I know
that there is none there.  When he turned the tap, however, lo
and behold, the best of wine ran out.  So he took it to them, and
the two passed the night there.  Early next day our Lord told
gambling Hansel that he might beg three favors.  The Lord
expected that he would ask to go to heaven, but gambling Hansel
asked for a pack of cards with which he could win everything,
for dice with which he would win everything, and for a tree
whereon every kind of fruit would grow, and from which no one who
had climbed up, could descend until he bade him do so.  The Lord
gave him all that he had asked, and departed with St. Peter.
And now gambling Hansel at once set about gambling in real
earnest, and before long he had gained half the world.  Upon this
St. Peter said to the Lord, Lord, this thing must not go on, at
last he will win the whole world.  We must send death to him.
And they sent death to him.  When death appeared, gambling Hansel
had just seated himself at the gaming-table, and death said,
Hansel, come out a while.  But gambling Hansel said, just wait
a little until the game is done, and in the meantime get up into
that tree out there, and gather a little fruit that we may have
something to munch on our way.  Thereupon death climbed up, but
when he wanted to come down again, he could not, and gambling
Hansel left him up there for seven years, during which time no one
died.
So St. Peter said to the Lord, Lord, this thing must not go on.
People no longer die, we must go ourselves.  And they went
themselves, and the Lord commanded Hansel to let death come down.
So Hansel went at once to death and said to him, come down, and
death took him directly and put an end to him.  They went away
together and came to the next world, and then gambling
Hansel made straight for the door of heaven, and knocked at it.
Who is there.  Gambling Hansel.  Ah, we will have nothing to do
with him.  Begone.  So he went to the door of purgatory, and
knocked once more.  Who is there.  Gambling Hansel.  Ah, there is
quite enough weeping and wailing here without him.  We do not
want to gamble, just go away again.  Then he went to the door of
hell, and there they let him in.  There was, however, no one at
home but old lucifer and the crooked devils - the straight ones
were just busy in the world.  And no sooner was Hansel there than
he sat down to gamble again.  Lucifer, however, had nothing to
lose, but his mis-shapen devils, and gambling Hansel won them
from him, as with his cards he could not fail to do.  And now he
was off again with his crooked devils, and they went to hohenfurt
and pulled up a hop-pole, and with it went to heaven and began to
thrust the pole against it, and heaven began to crack.  So again
St. Peter said, Lord, this thing cannot go on, we must let him
in, or he will overthrow the whole heaven.  And they let him in.
But gambling Hansel instantly began to play again, and there was
such a noise and confusion that there was no hearing what they
themselves were saying.  Therefore St. Peter once more said,
Lord, this cannot go on, we must throw him down, or he will make
all heaven rebellious.  So they went to him at once, and threw
him down, and his soul broke into fragments, and went into the
gambling vagabonds who are living this very day.
The fox once came to a meadow in which sat a flock of fine fat
geese, on which he smiled and said, I come in the nick of time,
you are sitting together quite beautifully, so that I can eat you
up one after the other.  The geese cackled with terror, sprang
up, and began to wail and beg piteously for their lives.  But
the fox would listen to nothing, and said, there is no mercy
to be had.  You must die.  At length one of them took heart and
said,  if we poor geese are to yield up our lives, show us the
only possible favor and allow us one more prayer, that we may
not die in our sins, and then we will place ourselves in a row,
so that you can always pick yourself out the fattest.  Yes,
said the fox, that is reasonable, and a pious request.  Pray
away, I will wait till you are done.  Then the first began a
good long prayer, for ever saying, ga, ga, and as she would
make no end, the second did not wait until her turn came, but
began also, ga, ga.  The third
and fourth followed her, and soon they were all cackling
together.
When they have done praying, the story shall be continued further,
but at present they are still praying unceasingly.
In olden times, when the Lord himself still used to walk about on
this earth amongst men, it once happened that he was tired and
overtaken by the darkness before he could reach an inn.  Now
there stood on the road before him two houses facing each other,
the one large and beautiful, the other small and poor.  The
large one belonged to a rich man, and the small one to a poor
man.
Then the Lord thought, I shall be no burden to the rich man.
I will stay the night with him.  Then the rich man heard someone
knocking at his door, he opened the window and asked the stranger
what he wanted.  The Lord answered, I only ask for a night's
lodging.
Then the rich man looked at the traveler from head to foot, and
as the Lord was wearing common clothes, and did not look like
one who had much money in his pocket, he shook his head, and
said, no, I cannot take you in, my rooms are full of herbs and
seeds.  And if I were to lodge everyone who knocked at my door,
I might very soon go begging myself.  Go somewhere else for
a lodging, and with this he shut down the window and left the
Lord standing there.
So the Lord turned his back on the rich man, and went across
to the small house and knocked.  He had hardly done so when
the poor man opened the little door and bade the traveler
come in.  Pass the night with me, it is already dark, said he.
You cannot go any further to-night.  This pleased the Lord,
and he went in.  The poor man's wife shook hands with him,
and welcomed him, and said he
was to make himself at home and put up with what they had got.
They had not much to offer him, but what they had they would
give him with all their hearts.  Then she put the potatoes on
the fire, and while they were boiling, she milked the goat,
that they might have a little milk with them.  When the
cloth was laid, the Lord sat down with the man and his wife,
and he enjoyed their coarse food, for there were happy faces
at the table.  When they had had supper and it was bed-time,
the woman called her husband apart and said, listen, dear
husband, let us make up a bed of straw for ourselves to-night,
and then the poor traveler can sleep in our bed and have a
good rest, for he has been walking the whole day through,
and that makes one weary.  With all my heart, he answered,
I will go and offer it to him.  And he went to the stranger
and invited him, if he had no objection, to sleep in their
bed and rest his limbs properly.  But the Lord was unwilling
to take their bed from the two old folks.  However, they
would not be satisfied, until at length he did it and lay
down in their bed, while they themselves lay on some straw
on the ground.
Next morning they got up before daybreak, and made as good a
breakfast as they could for the guest.  When the sun shone in
through the little window, and the Lord had got up, he again
ate with them, and then prepared to set out on his journey.
But as he was standing at the door he turned round and said,
as you are so kind and good, you may wish three things for
yourselves and I will grant them.  Then the man said, what
else should I wish for but eternal happiness, and that we
two, as long as we live, may be healthy and have every day
our daily bread.  For the third wish, I do not know what to
have.  And the Lord said to him, will you wish for a new
house instead of this old one.  Oh, yes, said the man.
If I can have that, too, I should like it very much.  And
the Lord fulfilled his wish, and changed their old house
into a new one, again gave them his blessing, and went on.
The sun was high when the rich man got up and leaned out
of his window and saw, on the opposite side of the way, a
new clean-looking
house with red tiles and bright windows where the old hut
used to be.  He was very much astonished, and called his
wife and said to her, tell me, what can have happened.
Last night there was a miserable little hut standing there,
and to-day there is a beautiful new house.  Run over and see
how that has come to pass.
So his wife went and asked the poor man, and he said to her,
yesterday evening a traveler came here and asked for a
night's lodging, and this morning when he took leave of
us he granted us three wishes - eternal happiness, health
during this life and our daily bread as well, and
besides this, a beautiful new house instead of our old
hut.
When the rich man's wife heard this, she ran back in haste
and told her husband how it had happened.  The man said,
I could tear myself to pieces.  If I had but known that.
That traveler came to our house too, and wanted to sleep
here, and I sent him away.  Quick, said his wife, get on
your horse.  You can still catch the man up, and then you must
ask to have three wishes granted to you also.
The rich man followed the good counsel and galloped away on
his horse, and soon came up with the Lord.  He spoke to him
softly and pleasantly, and begged him not to take it
amiss that he had not let him in directly.  He was looking
for the front-door key, and in the meantime the stranger had
gone away.  If he returned the same way he must come and
stay with him.  Yes, said the Lord.  If I ever come back
again, I will do so.  Then the rich man asked if might not
wish for three things too, as his neighbor had done.
Yes, said the Lord, he might, but it would not be to his
advantage, and he had better not wish for anything.  But
the rich man thought that he could easily ask for something
which would add to his happiness, if he only knew that it would
be granted.  So the Lord said to him, ride home, then, and
three wishes which you shall make, shall be fulfilled.
The rich man had now gained what he wanted, so he rode home,
and began to consider what he should wish for.  As he
was thus
thinking he let the bridle fall, and the horse began to caper
about, so that he was continually disturbed in his meditations,
and could not collect his thoughts at all.  He patted its neck,
and said, gently, lisa, but the horse only began new tricks.
Then at last he was angry, and cried quite impatiently, I wish
your neck was broken.  Directly he had said the words, down the
horse fell on the ground, and there it lay dead and never
moved again.  And thus was his first wish fulfilled.  As he
was miserly by nature, he did not like to leave the harness
lying there.  So he cut it off, and put it on his back.  And
now he had to go on foot.  I have still two wishes left, said
he, and comforted himself with that thought.
And now as he was walking slowly through the sand, and the
sun was burning hot at noon-day, he grew quite bad-tempered
and angry.  The saddle hurt his back, and he had not yet any
idea what to wish for.  If I were to wish for all the riches
and treasures in the world, said he to himself, I should still
to think of all kinds of other things later on.  I know that,
beforehand.  But I will manage so that there is nothing at all
left me to wish for afterwards.  Then he sighed and said, ah,
if I were but that bavarian peasant, who likewise had three
wishes granted to him, and knew quite well what to do, and
in the first place wished for a great deal of beer, and in
the second for as much beer as he was able to drink, and in
the third for a barrel of beer into the bargain.
Many a time he thought he had found it, but then it seemed to
him to be, after all, too little.  Then it came into his
mind, what an easy life his wife had, for she stayed at
home in a cool room and enjoyed herself.  This really did vex
him, and before he was aware, he said, I just wish she was
sitting there on this saddle, and could not get off it,
instead of my having to drag it along on my back.  And as the
last word was spoken, the saddle disappeared from his back,
and he saw that his second wish had been fulfilled.  Then
he really did feel hot.  He began to run and wanted to be quite
alone in his own room at home, to think of something really
big for his last wish.  But when he arrived there and opened
the parlor-door, he
saw his wife sitting in the middle of the room on the saddle,
crying and complaining, and quite unable to get off it.  So
he said, do bear it, and I will wish for all the riches on
earth for you, only stay where you are.  She, however, called
him a fool, and said, what good will all the riches on earth
do me, if I am to sit on this saddle.  You have wished me
on it, so you must help me off.  So whether he would or not,
he was forced to let his third wish be that she should be
quit of the saddle, and able to get off it, and immediately
the wish was fulfilled.  So he got nothing by it but vexation,
trouble, abuse, and the loss of his horse.  But the poor
people lived contentedly, quietly, and piously until their
happy death.
Once upon a time lived a peasant and his wife, and the parson
of the village had a fancy for the wife, and had wished for
a long while to spend a whole day happily with her.  The
peasant woman, too, was quite willing.  One day, therefore, he
said to the woman, listen, my dear friend, I have now thought of
a way by which we can for once spend a whole day happily together.
I'll tell you what.  On wednesday, you must take to your bed, and
tell your husband you are ill, and as long as you complain and
act being ill properly, and go on doing so until sunday when I
have to preach, I will then say in my sermon that whosoever has
at home a sick child, a sick husband, a sick wife, a sick father,
a sick mother, a sick brother or whosoever else it may be,
and makes a pilgrimage to the gockerli hill in italy, where
you can get a peck of laurel-leaves for a kreuzer, the sick child,
the sick husband, the sick wife, the sick father, or sick mother,
the sick sister, or whosoever else it may be, will be restored
to health immediately.
I will manage it, said the woman promptly.  On the wednesday,
therefore, the peasant woman took to her bed, and complained and
lamented as agreed on, and her husband did everything for
her that he could think of, but nothing did her any good, and when
sunday came the woman said, I feel as ill as if I were going to
die at once, but there is one thing I should like to do before
my end - I should like to hear the parson's sermon that he is
going to preach to-day.  On that the peasant said, ah, my child,
do not do it - you might make yourself worse if you were to get
up.  Look, I will hear the sermon, and will attend to it very
carefully, and will tell you everything the parson says.
Well, said the woman, go, then, and pay great attention, and
repeat to me all that you hear.  So the peasant heard the sermon,
and the parson said, if any one had at home a sick child, a sick
husband, a sick wife, a sick father a sick mother, a sick sister,
brother or any one else, and would make a pilgimage to the
gockerli hill in italy, where a peck of laurel-leaves costs a
kreuzer, the sick child, sick husband, sick wife, sick father,
sick mother, sick sister, brother, or whosoever else it might
be, would be restored to health instantly, and whosoever wished
to undertake the journey was to go to him after the service was
over, and he would give him the sack for the laurel-leaves and
the kreuzer.  Then no one was more rejoiced than the peasant,
and after the service was over, he went at once to the parson,
who gave him the bag for the laurel-leaves and the kreuzer.
After that he went home, and even at the house door he cried,
hurrah.  Dear wife, it is now almost the same thing as if you were
well.  The parson has preached to-day that whosoever had at home
a sick child, a sick husband, a sick wife, a sick father, a sick
mother, a sick sister, brother or whoever it might be, and would
make a pilgrimage to the gockerli hill in italy, where a peck
of laurel-leaves costs a kreuzer, the sick child, sick husband,
sick wife, sick father, sick mother, sick sister, brother, or
whosoever else it was, would be cured immediately, and now I
have already got the bag and the kreuzer from the parson, and
will at once begin my journey so that you may get well the faster,
and thereupon he went away.  He was hardly gone however before
the woman got up, and the parson was there immediately.
But now we will leave these two for a while, and follow the
peasant, who walked on quickly without stopping, in order to
get the sooner to the gockerli hill, and on his way he met his
gossip.  His gossip was an egg-merchant, and was just coming
from the market, where he had sold his eggs.  May you be blessed,
said the gossip, where are you off to so fast.
To all eternity, my friend, said the peasant, my wife is ill,
and I have been to-day to hear the parson's sermon, and he
preached that if any one had in his house a sick child, a sick
husband, a sick
wife, a sick father, a sick mother, a sick sister, brother or any
one else, and made a pilgrimage to the gockerli hill in italy,
where a peck of laurel-leaves costs a kreuzer, the sick child, the
sick husband, the sick wife, the sick father, the sick mother,
the sick sister, brother or whosoever else it was, would be
cured immediately, and so I have got the bag for the laurel-leaves
and the kreuzer from the parson, and now I am beginning my
pilgrimage.  But listen, gossip, said the egg-merchant to the
peasant, are you, then, stupid enough to believe such a thing
as that.  Don't you know what it means.  The parson wants to
spend a whole day alone with your wife in peace, so he has given
you this job to do to get you out of the way.
My word, said the peasant.  How I'd like to know if that's true.
Come, then, said the gossip, I'll tell you what to do.  Get
into my egg-basket and I will carry you home, and then you will
see for yourself.  So that was settled, and the gossip put the
peasant into his egg-basket and carried him home.
When they got to the house, hurrah.  Everything was already
very merry there.  The woman had already had nearly everything
killed that was in the farmyard, and had made pancakes, and the
parson was there, and had brought his fiddle with him.  The
gossip knocked at the door, and woman asked who was there.  It
is I, gossip, said the egg-merchant, give me shelter this night.
I have not sold my eggs at the market, so now I have to carry
them home again, and they are so heavy that I shall never be able
to do it, for it is dark already.
Indeed, my friend, said the woman, you come at a very inconvenient
time for me, but as you are here it can't be helped.  Come in,
and take a seat there on the bench by the stove.  Then she
placed the gossip and the basket which he carried on his back on
the bench by the stove.  The parson and the woman, however, were
as merry as could be.  At length the parson said, listen, my
dear friend, you can sing beautifully.  Sing something to me.
Oh, said the woman,
I cannot sing now.  In my young days indeed I could sing well
enough, but that's all over now.
Come, said the parson once more, do sing some little song.
On that the woman began and sang,
          I've sent my husband away from me
          to the gockerli hill in italy.
Thereupon the parson sang,
          I wish 'twas a year before he came back,
          I'd never ask him for the laurel-leaf sack.
          Hallelujah.
Then the gossip who was in the background began to sing -
but I ought to tell you the peasant was called hildebrand -
so the gossip sang,
          what are you doing, my hildebrand dear,
          there on the bench by the stove so near.
          Hallelujah.
And then the peasant sang from his basket,
          all singing I ever shall hate from this day,
          and here in this basket no longer I'll stay.
          Hallelujah.
And he climbed out of the basket, and flogged the parson
out of the house.
There was once upon a time a poor peasant called crabb, who drove
with two oxen a load of wood to the town, and sold it to a doctor
for two talers.  When the money was being counted out to him, it
so happened that the doctor was sitting at table, and when the
peasant saw how well he ate and drank, his heart desired what he
saw, and he would willingly have been a doctor too.  So he
remained standing a while, and at length inquired if he too could
not be a doctor.  Oh, yes, said the doctor, that is soon managed.
What must I do, asked the peasant.  In the first place buy
yourself an abc book of the kind which has a cock on the
frontispiece.  In the second, turn your cart and your two oxen
into money, and get yourself some clothes, and whatsoever else
pertains to medicine.  Thirdly, have a sign painted for yourself
with the words, I am doctor knowall, and have that nailed up above
your house-door.  The peasant did everything that he had been
told to do.  When he had doctored people awhile, but not long, a
rich and great lord had some money stolen.  Then he was told about
doctor knowall who lived in such and such a village, and must know
what had become of the money.  So the lord had the horses
harnessed to his carriage, drove out to the village, and asked
crabb if he were doctor knowall.  Yes, he
was, he said.  Then he was to go with him and bring back the stolen
money.  Oh, yes, but grete, my wife, must go too.  The lord was
willing and let both of them have a seat in the carriage, and
they all drove away together.  When they came to the nobleman's
castle, the table was spread, and crabb was told to sit down and
eat.  Yes, but my wife, grete, too, said he, and he seated himself
with her at the table.  And when the first servant came with a
dish of delicate fare, the peasant nudged his wife, and said,
grete, that was the first.  Meaning that was the servant who
brought the first dish.  The servant, however, thought he
intended by that to say, that is the first thief, and as he
actually was so, he was terrified, and said to his comrade
outside, the doctor knows all, we shall fare ill, he said I was
the first.  The second did not want to go in at all, but was
forced.  So when he went in with his dish, the peasant nudged his
wife, and said, grete, that is the second.  This servant was
equally alarmed, and he got out as fast as he could.  The third
fared no better, for the peasant again said, grete, that is the
third.  The fourth had to carry in a dish that was covered, and the
lord told the doctor that he was to show his skill, and guess
what was beneath the cover.  Actually, there were crabs.  The
doctor looked at the dish, had no idea what to say, and cried,
ah, poor crabb.  When the lord heard that, he cried, there.  He
knows it, he must also know who had the money.
On this the servants looked terribly uneasy, and made a sign
to the doctor that they wished him to step outside for a moment.
When therefore he went out, all four of them confessed to him
that they had stolen the money, and said that they would
willingly restore it and give him a heavy sum into the bargain,
if he would not denounce them, for if he did they would be hanged.
They led him to the spot where the money was concealed.  With
this the doctor was satisfied, and returned to the hall, sat
down to the table, and said, my lord, now will I search in my book
where the gold is hidden.  The fifth servant, however, crept
into the stove to hear if the doctor knew still more.  But the
doctor sat still and opened his abc book, turned the pages
backwards and forwards, and looked for the cock.  As he could not
find it immediately he said, I know you are there, so you had
better come out.  Then the fellow in the stove thought that the
doctor meant him, and full of terror, sprang out, crying, that
man knows everything.  Then Dr. Knowall showed the lord where the
money was, but did not say who had stolen it, and received from
both sides much money in reward, and became a renowned man.
There was once a rich man, who had a servant who served him
diligently and honestly.  He was every morning the first out of
bed, and the last to go to rest at night, and whenever there was
a difficult job to be done, which nobody cared to undertake, he
was always the first to set himself to it.  Moreover, he never
complained, but was contented with everything and always merry.
When a year was ended, his master gave him no wages, for he said
to himself, that is the cleverest way, for I shall save something
and he will not go away, but stay quietly in my service.  The
servant said nothing, but did his work the second year as he had
done it the first, and when at the end of this, likewise, he
received no wages, he submitted and still stayed on.
When the third year also was past, the master considered, put his
hand in his pocket, but pulled nothing out.  Then at last the
servant said, master, for three years I have served you honestly,
be so good as to give me what I ought to have, for I wish to
leave, and look about me a little more in the world.
Yes, my good fellow, answered the old miser, you have served me
industriously, and therefore you shall be graciously rewarded.
And he put his hand into his pocket, but counted out only three
farthings, saying, there, you have a farthing for each year, that
is large and liberal pay, such as you would have received from
few masters.
The honest servant, who understood little about money, put his
fortune into his pocket, and thought, ah, now that I have my
purse full, why need I trouble and plague myself any longer with
hard work.  So on he went, up hill and down dale, and sang and
jumped to his heart's content.  Now it came to pass that as he
was going by a thicket a little man stepped out, and called to
him, whither away, merry brother.  I see you do not carry many
cares.  Why should I be sad, answered the servant, I have enough.
Three years, wages are jingling in my pocket.
How much is your treasure, the dwarf asked him.  How much.  Three
farthings sterling, all told.  Look here, said the dwarf, I am a
poor needy man, give me your three farthings, I can work no longer
but you are young, and can easily earn your bread.
And as the servant had a good heart, and felt pity for the little
man, he gave him the three farthings, saying, take them in the
name of heaven, I shall not be any the worse for it.
Then the little man said, as I see you have a good heart I grant
you three wishes, one for each farthing, they shall all be
fulfilled.  Aha, said the servant, you are one of those who can
work wonders.  Well, then, if it is to be so, I wish, first, for
a gun, which shall hit everything that I aim at, secondly, for a
fiddle, which when
I play on it, shall compel all who hear it to dance, thirdly, that
if I ask a favor of any one he shall not be able to refuse it.
All that shall you have, said the dwarf, and put his hand into the
bush, and just imagine, there lay a fiddle and gun, all ready,
just as if they had been ordered.  These he gave to the servant,
and then said to him, whatever you may ask at any time, no man in
the world shall be able to deny you.
Heart alive.  What more can one desire, said the servant, to
himself, and went merrily onwards.  Soon afterwards he met a Jew
with a long goat's beard, who was standing listening to the song
of a bird which was sitting up at the top of a tree.  Good
heavens, he was exclaiming, that such a small creature should have
such a fearfully loud voice.  If it were but mine.  If only
someone would sprinkle some salt upon its tail.  If that is all,
said the servant, the bird shall soon be down here.  And taking
aim he blew, and down fell the bird into the thorn-bushes.  Go,
you rogue, he said to the Jew, and fetch the bird out for
yourself.
Oh, said the Jew, leave out the rogue, my master, and I will do it
at once.  I will get the bird out for myself, now that you have
hit it.  Then he lay down on the ground, and began to crawl
into the thicket.
When he was fast among the thorns, the good servant's humor
so tempted him that he took up his fiddle and began to play.  In a
moment the Jew's legs began to move, and to jump into the air, and
the more the servant fiddled the better went the dance.  But the
thorns tore his shabby coat from him, combed his beard, and
pricked and plucked him all over the body.  Oh, dear, cried the
Jew, what do I want with your fiddling.  Leave the fiddle alone
master, I do not want to dance.
But the servant did not listen to him, and thought, you have
fleeced people often enough, now the thorn-bushes shall do the
same to you.  And he began to play over again, so that the Jew
had to jump higher than ever, and scraps of his coat were left
hanging on the thorns.  Oh, woe's me, cried the Jew, I will give
the gentleman whatsoever he asks if only he leaves off fiddling,
a whole purseful of gold.  If you are so liberal, said the servant,
I will stop my music, but this I must say to your credit, that
you dance to it so well that one must really admire it.  And
having taken the purse he went his way.
The Jew stood still and watched the servant quietly until he was
far off and out of sight, and then he screamed out with all his
might, you miserable musician, you beer-house fiddler.  Wait till
I catch you alone, I will hunt you till the soles of your shoes
fall off.  You ragamuffin, just put six farthings in your mouth,
that you may be worth three halfpence.  And went on abusing him as
fast as he could speak.  As soon as he had refreshed himself a
little in this way, and got his breath again, he ran into the town
to the justice.
My lord judge, he said, I have come to make a complaint, see how
a rascal has robbed and ill-treated me on the public highway.  A
stone on the ground might pity me, my clothes all torn, my body
pricked and scratched, my little all gone with my purse - good
ducats, each piece better than the last, for God's sake let the
man be thrown into prison.
Was it a soldier, said the judge, who cut you thus with his
sabre.  Nothing of the sort, said the Jew, it was no sword that he
had, but a gun hanging at his back, and a fiddle at his neck, the
wretch may easily be recognized.
So the judge sent his people out after the man, and they found the
good servant, who had been going quite slowly along, and they
found, too, the purse with the money upon him.  As soon as he
was taken before the judge he said, I did not touch the Jew, nor
take his money, he gave it to me of his own free will, that I
might leave off fiddling because he could not bear my music.
Heaven defend us, cried the Jew, his lies are as thick as flies
upon the wall.
But the judge also did not believe his tale, and said, this is
a bad defence, no Jew would do that.  And because he had committed
robbery on the public highway, he sentenced the good servant to be
hanged.  As he was being led away the Jew again screamed after
him, you vagabond.  You dog of a fiddler.  Now you are going to
receive your well-earned reward.  The servant walked quietly with
the hangman up the ladder, but upon the last step he turned round
and said to the judge, grant me just one request before I die.
Yes, if you do not ask your life, said the judge.
I do not ask for life, answered the servant, but as a last favor
let me play once more upon my fiddle.
The Jew raised a great cry of, murder.  Murder.  For goodness,
sake do not allow it.  Do not allow it.  But the judge said, why
should I not let him have this short pleasure.  It has been
granted to him, and he shall have it.  However, he could not have
refused on account of the gift which had been bestowed on the
servant.
Then the Jew cried, oh.  Woe's me.  Tie me, tie me fast.  While
the good servant took his fiddle from his neck, and made ready.
As he gave the first scrape, they all began to quiver and shake,
the judge, his clerk, and the hangman and his men, and the cord
fell out of the hand of the one who was going to tie the Jew
fast.  At the second scrape they all leaped up and began to
dance, the judge and the Jew being the best at jumping.  Soon all
who had gathered in the market-place out of curiosity were dancing
with them, old and young, fat and lean, one with another.  The
dogs, likewise, which had run there, got up on their hind legs
and capered about, and the longer he played, the higher sprang
the dancers, so that they knocked against each other's heads
and began to shriek terribly.
At length the judge cried, quite of breath, I will give you your
life if you will only stop fiddling.  The good servant thereupon
had compassion, took his fiddle and hung it round his neck again,
and stepped down the ladder.  Then he went up to the Jew, who was
lying upon the ground panting for breath, and said, you rascal,
now confess, whence you got the money, or I will take my fiddle
and begin to play again.  I stole it, I stole it, cried he, but
you have honestly earned it.  So the judge had the Jew taken
to the gallows and hanged as a thief.
A countryman was once going out to plough with a pair of oxen.
When he got to the field, both the animals, horns began to grow,
and went on growing, and when he wanted to go home they were so
big that the oxen could not get through the gateway.  By good
luck a butcher came by just then, and he delivered them over to
him, and made the bargain in this way, that he should bring the
butcher a peck of rape-seed, and then the butcher was to count him
out a brabant taler for every seed.  I call that well sold.  The
peasant now went home, and carried the peck of rape-seed to him on
his back.  On the way, however, he lost one seed out of the bag.
The butcher paid him justly as agreed on, and if the peasant had
not lost the seed, he would have had one taler more.  By the time
he returned, the seed had grown into a tree which reached up to
the sky.  Then thought the peasant, as you have the chance,
you must just see what the angels are doing up there above.  So
he climbed up, and saw that the angels above were threshing oats,
and he looked on.  While he was thus watching them, he observed
that the tree on which he was standing, was beginning to totter.
He peeped down, and saw that someone was just going to cut it
down.  If I were to fall down from hence
it would be a bad thing, thought he, and in his extremity he did
not know how to save himself better than by taking the chaff of the
oats which lay there in heaps, and twisting a rope of it.  He
likewise snatched a hoe and a flail which were lying about in
heaven, and let himself down by the rope.  But he came down on
the earth exactly in the middle of a deep, deep hole.  So it was
a real stroke of luck that he had brought the hoe, for he hoed
himself a flight of steps with it, and mounted up, and took the
flail with him as a token of his truth, so that no one could have
any doubt of his story.
Three army surgeons who thought they knew their art perfectly
were traveling about the world, and they came to an inn where
they wanted to pass the night.  The host asked whence they came,
and whither they were going.  We are roaming about the world and
practising our art.  Show me just once what you can do, said
the host.  Then the first said he would cut off his hand, and put
it on again early next morning.  The second said he would tear
out his heart, and replace it next morning.  The third said he would
gouge out his eyes and heal them again next morning.  If you can
do that, said the innkeeper, you have learnt everything.  They,
however, had a salve, with which they rubbed themselves, which
joined parts together, and they constantly carried with them the
little bottle in which it was.  Then they cut the hand, heart
and eyes from their bodies as they had said they would, and laid
them all together on a plate, and gave it to the innkeeper.
The innkeeper gave it to a servant-girl who was to set it in the
cupboard, and take good care of it.  Secretly, however, the girl
had a lover, who was a soldier.  When therefore the innkeeper,
the three army surgeons, and everyone else in the house were asleep,
the soldier came and wanted something to eat.  The girl opened
the cupboard and brought him some food, and in her love forgot
to shut the cupboard-door again.  She seated herself at the table
by her lover, and they chatted away together.  While she sat so
contentedly there, thinking of no ill luck, the cat came creeping
in, found the cupboard open, took the hand and heart and eyes of
the three army surgeons, and ran off with them.  When the soldier
had done eating, and the girl was taking away the things and
going to shut the cupboard, she saw that the plate which the
innkeeper had given her to take care of, was empty.  Then she
said in a fright to her lover, ah, miserable girl, what shall I
do.  The hand is gone, the heart and the eyes are gone too, what
will become of me in the morning.  Be easy, said he, I will
help you out of your trouble.  There is a thief hanging outside
on the gallows, I will cut off his hand.  Which hand was it.
The right one.  Then the girl gave him a sharp knife, and he went
and cut the poor sinner's right hand off, and brought it to her.
After this he caught the cat and gouged its eyes out, and now
nothing but the heart was missing.  Have you not been slaughtering,
and are not the dead pigs in the cellar, said he.  Yes, said the
girl.  That's fine, said the soldier, and he went down and fetched
a pig's heart.  The girl placed all together on the plate, and
put it in the cupboard, and when after this her lover took leave
of her, she went quietly to bed.
In the morning when the three army surgeons got up, they told
the girl she was to bring them the plate on which the
hand, heart, and eyes were lying.  Then she brought it out of
the cupboard, and the first fixed the thief's hand on and smeared
it with his salve, and it promptly grew to his arm.  The second
took the cat's eyes and put them in his own head.  The third
fixed the pig's heart firm in the place where his own had been,
and the innkeeper stood by, admired their skill, and said he
had never yet seen such a thing as
that done, and would sing their praises and recommend them to
everyone.  Then they paid their bill, and traveled further.
As they were on their way, the one with the pig's heart did not
stay with them at all, but wherever there was a corner he ran
to it, and rooted about in it with his nose as pigs do.  The
others wanted to hold him back by the tail of his coat, but that
did no good.  He tore himself loose, and ran wherever the dirt was
deepest.  The second also behaved very strangely.  He rubbed
his eyes, and said to the others, comrades, what has happened.
These are not my eyes.  I don't see at all.  Will one of you lead
me, so that I do not fall.  Then with difficulty they traveled on
till evening, when they reached another inn.  They went into the
bar together, and there at a table in the corner sat a rich man
counting money.  The one with the thief's hand walked round
about him, made a few jerky movements with his arm, and at
last when the stranger turned away, snatched at the pile of money,
and took a handful from it.  One of them saw this, and
said, comrade, what are you about.  You must not steal, shame
on you.  Eh, said he, but what can I do.  My hand twitches, and
I am forced to snatch things whether I will or not.
After this, they lay down to sleep, and while they were lying
there it was so dark that no one could see his own hand.  All
at once the one with the cat's eyes awoke, aroused the others,
and said, brothers, just look up, do you see the white mice
running about there.  The two sat up, but could see nothing.  Then
said he, things are not right with us, we have not got back
again what is ours.  We must return to the innkeeper, he has
deceived us.  So they went back the next morning, and told the
host they had not received what was their own, that the first
had a thief's hand, the second cat's eyes, and the third a
pig's heart.  The innkeeper said that the girl must be to blame
for that, and was going to call her, but when she had seen the
three coming, she had run out by the backdoor, and not come back.
Then the three said he must give them a great deal of money, or
they would set the red cock on his roof. - The symbol of a red
cock for fire is of remote antiquity. - He gave them what he
had, and whatever he could raise, and the three went away
with it.  It was enough for the rest of their lives, but they
would rather have had their own rightful organs.
Seven swabians were once together.  The first was master
schulz, the second, jackli, the third, marli, the fourth,
jergli, the fifth, michal, the sixth, Hans, the seventh,
veitli.  All seven had made up their minds to travel
about the world to seek adventures and perform great
deeds.  But in order that they might go in safety and with
arms in their hands, they thought it would be advisable
that they should have one solitary, but very strong,
and very long spear made for them.  This spear all seven of
them took in their hands at once.  In front walked the
boldest and bravest,
and that was master schulz.  All the others followed in a
row, and veitli was the last.  Then it came to pass one
day in the hay month, when they had walked a long distance,
and still had a long way to go before they reached the
village where they were to pass the night, that as they
were in a meadow in the twilight a great beetle or hornet
flew by them from behind a bush, and hummed in a menacing
manner.  Master schulz was so terrified that he all but dropped
the spear, and a cold sweat broke out over his whole body.
Hark, hark, cried he to his comrades, good heavens.  I hear a
drum.  Jackli, who was behind him holding the spear, and into
whose nose some smell had risen, said, something is most
certainly going on, for I smell the powder and the match.  At
these words master schulz began to take to flight, and in a
trice jumped
over a hedge, but as he just happened to jump on to the teeth of
a rake which had been left lying there after the hay-making, the
handle of it struck against his face and gave him a tremendous
blow.  O dear.  O dear, screamed master schulz.  Take me
prisoner, I surrender, I surrender.  The other six all leapt
over, one on the top of the other, crying, if you surrender, I
surrender too.  If you surrender, I surrender too.  At length,
as no enemy was there to bind and take them away, they saw that
they had been mistaken, and in order that the story might not
be known, and they be treated as fools and ridiculed, they
all swore to each other to hold their peace about it until one
of them should speak of it by mistake.
Then they journeyed onwards.  The second danger which they
survived cannot be compared with the first.  Some days afterwards,
their path led them through a fallow-field where a hare was sitting
sleeping in the sun.  Her ears were standing straight up, and her
great glassy eyes were wide open.  All of them were alarmed at
the sight of the horrible wild beast, and they consulted together
as to what it would be the least dangerous to do.  For if they
were to run away, they knew that the monster would pursue and
swallow them whole.  So they said, we must go through a great
and dangerous struggle.  Boldly ventured, is half won, and all
seven grasped the spear, master schulz in front, and veitli
behind.  Master schulz was always trying to keep the spear
back, but veitli had become quite brave while behind, and wanted
to dash forward and cried,
          strike home, in every swabian's name,
          or else I wish you may be lame.
But Hans knew how to meet this, and said,
          thunder and lightning, it's fine to prate,
          but for dragon-hunting you are always late.
Michal cried,
          nothing is missing, not even a hair,
          be sure the devil himself is there.
Then it was jergli's turn, and he said,
          if it be not he, it's at least his mother,
          or else the devil's own step-brother.
And now marli had a bright thought, and said to veitli,
          advance, veitli, advance, advance,
          and I behind will hold the lance.
Veitli, however, did not obey, and jackli said,
          tis schulz's place the first to be,
          no one deserves that honor but he.
Then master schulz plucked up his courage, and said, gravely,
          then let us boldly advance to the fight,
          thus we shall show our valor and might.
Hereupon they all together set on the dragon.  Master
schulz crossed himself and prayed for God's assistance, but
as all this was of no avail, and he was getting nearer and nearer
to the enemy, he screamed, oho, oho, ho, ho, ho, in the greatest
anguish.  This awakened the hare, which in great alarm darted
swiftly away.  When master schulz saw her thus flying from the
field of battle, he cried in his joy,
          quick, veitli, quick, look there, look there,
          the monster's nothing but a hare.
But the swabian allies went in search of further adventures, and
came to the moselle, a mossy, quiet, deep river, over which there are
few bridges, and which in many places people have to cross in
boats.  As the seven swabians did not know this, they called
to a man who was working on the opposite side of the river, to
know how people contrived to get across.  The distance and their
way of speaking made the man unable to understand what they
wanted, and he said, what, what, in the way people speak in
the neighborhood of treves.  Master schulz thought he was saying,
wade, wade through the water, and as he was the first, began
to set out and
went into the moselle.  It was not long before he sank in the
mud and the deep waves which drove against him, but his hat was
blown on the opposite shore by the wind, and a frog sat down
beside it, and croaked, wat, wat, wat.  The other six on the
opposite side heard that, and said, oho, comrades, master
schulz is calling us.  If he can wade across, why cannot we.
So they all jumped into the water together in a great hurry, and
were drowned, and thus one frog took the lives of all six of
them, and not one of the swabian allies ever reached home again.
There were once three apprentices, who had agreed to keep always
together while traveling, and always to work in the same
town.  At one time, however, their masters had no more work
to give them, so that at last they were in rags, and had nothing
to live on.  Then one of them said, what shall we do.  We cannot
stay here any longer, we will travel once more, and if we do
not find any work in the town we go to, we will arrange with
the innkeeper there, that we are to write and tell him where we
are staying, so that we can always have news of each other, and
then we will separate.  And that seemed best to the others also.
They went forth, and met on the way a richly-dressed man who
asked who they were.  We are apprentices looking for work.  Up to
this time we have kept together, but if we cannot find anything
to do we are going to separate.  There is no need for that, said
the man, if you will do what I tell you, you shall not want for
gold or for work.  Nay, you shall become great lords, and drive
in your carriages.  One of them said, if our souls and salvation
be not endangered, we will certainly do it.  They will not,
replied the man,
I have no claim on you.  One of the others, however, had looked
at his feet, and when he saw a horse's foot and a man's foot,
he did not want to have anything to do with him.  Then the
devil said, be easy, I have no designs on you, but on another
soul, which is half my own already, and whose measure shall
but run full.  As they were now secure, they consented, and the
devil told them what he wanted.  The first was to answer,
all three of us, to every question.  The second was to say,
for money, and the third, and quite right too.  They were always
to say this, one after the other, but they were not to say one
word more, and if they disobeyed this order, all their money would
disappear at once, but so long as they observed it, their pockets
would always be full.  As a beginning, he at once gave them as
much as they could carry, and told them to go to such and such
an inn when they got to the town.  They went to it, and the
innkeeper came to meet them, and asked if they wished for
anything to eat.  The first replied, all three of us.  Yes,
said the host, that is what I mean.  The second said, for money.
Of course, said the host.  The third said, and quite right too.
Certainly it is right, said the host.
Good meat and drink were now brought to them, and they were well
waited on.  After the dinner came the payment, and the innkeeper
gave the bill to the one who said, all three of us, the second
said, for money, and the third, and quite right too.  Indeed
it is right, said the host, all three pay, and without money I
can give nothing.  They, however, paid even more than he had
asked.  The lodgers, who were looking on, said, these people must
be mad.  Yes, indeed they are, said the host, they are not very
wise.  So they stayed some time in the inn, and said nothing else
but, all three of us, for money, and and quite right too.  But
they saw and knew all that was going on.  It so happened that a
great merchant came with a large sum of money, and said, sir
host, take care of my money for me, here are three crazy apprentices
who might steal it from me.  The host did as he was asked.  As
he was carrying the trunk into his room, he felt that it was
heavy with gold.  Thereupon he gave the three apprentices a
lodging below, but the merchant received a separate apartment
upstairs.  When it was midnight, and the host thought that all
were asleep, he came with his wife, and they had an axe and
struck the rich merchant dead.   And after they had murdered
him they went to bed again.  When it was day there was a great
outcry.  The merchant lay dead in bed bathed in blood.  All
the guests came running out, but the host said, the three
crazy apprentices have done this.  The lodgers confirmed it,
and said, it can have been no one else.  The innkeeper, however,
had them called, and said to them, have you killed the merchant.
All three of us, said the first.  For money, said the second.
And the third added, and quite right too.  There now, you hear,
said the host, they confess it themselves.  They were taken to
prison, therefore, and were to be tried.  When they saw that
things were going so seriously, they were after all afraid,
but at night the devil came and said, bear it just one day
longer, and do not spurn your luck, not one hair of your head
shall be hurt.
The next morning they were led to the bar, and the judge said,
are you the murderers.  All three of us.  Why did you kill the
merchant.  For money.  You wicked wretches, you have no
horror of your sins.  And quite right too.  They have confessed,
and are still stubborn, said the judge, lead them to death
instantly.  So they were taken out, and the host had to go with
them into the circle.  When they were taken hold of by the
executioner's men, and were just going to be led up to the
scaffold where the hangman was standing with naked sword,
a coach drawn by four chestnut horses came up suddenly, driving
so fast that fire flashed from the stones, and someone made
signs from the window with a
white handkerchief.  Then said the hangman, it is a pardon
coming, and pardon, pardon, was called from the carriage also.
Then the devil stepped out as a very noble gentleman,
beautifully dressed, and said, you three are innocent.  You
may now speak, make known what you have seen and heard.  Then
said the eldest, we did not kill the merchant, the murderer
is standing there in the circle, and he pointed to the innkeeper.
In proof of this, go into his cellar, where many others whom he
has killed are still hanging.  Then the judge sent the
executioner's men thither, and they found it was as the
apprentices said, and when they had informed the judge of this,
he caused the innkeeper to be led up, and his head was cut off.
Then said the devil to the three, now I have got the soul which
I wanted to have, and you are free, and have money for the
rest of your lives.
In a certain village there once lived a man and his wife, and
the wife was so lazy that she would never work at anything.
Whatever her husband gave her to spin, she did not get done,
and what she did spin she did not wind, but let it all remain
entangled in a heap.  If the man scolded her, she was always
ready with her tongue, and said, well, how should I wind it,
when I have no reel.  Just you go into the forest and get me
one.  If that is all, said the man, then I will go into the
forest, and get some wood for making reels.  Then the woman
was afraid that if he had the wood he would make her a reel
of it, and she would have to wind her yarn
off, and then begin to spin again.  She bethought herself a
little, and then a lucky idea occurred to her, and she
secretly followed the man into the forest, and when he had
climbed into a tree to choose and cut the wood, she crept
into the thicket below where he could not see her, and cried,
     he who cuts wood for reels shall die,
     and he who winds, shall perish.
The man listened, laid down his axe for a moment, and began
to consider what that could mean.  Well, he said at last,
what can that have been, my ears must have been singing, I
won't alarm myself for nothing.  So he once more seized the
axe, and began to hew.  Then again there came a cry from
below,
     he who cuts wood for reels shall die,
     and he who winds, shall perish.
He stopped, and felt afraid and alarmed, and pondered over
the circumstance.  But when a few moments had passed, he took
heart again, and a third time he stretched out his hand for
the axe, and began to cut.  But someone called out a third
time, and said loudly,
     he who cuts wood for reels shall die,
     and he who winds, shall perish.
That was enough for him, and all inclination had departed
from him, so he hastily descended the tree, and set out on
his way home.  The woman ran as fast as she could by byways
so as to get home
first.  So when he entered the parlor, she put on an
innocent look as if nothing had happened, and said, well,
have you brought a nice piece of wood for reels.  No, said he,
I see very well that winding won't do, and told her what had
happened to him in the forest, and from that time forth left
her in peace about it.  Neverthless after some time, the man
again began to complain of the disorder in the house.  Wife,
said he, it is really a shame that the spun yarn should lie
there all entangled.  I'll tell you what, said she, as we
still don't come by any reel, go you up into the loft, and I
will stand down below, and will throw the yarn up to you,
and you will throw it down to me, and so we shall get a
skein after all.  Yes, that will do, said the man.  So they
did that, and when it was done, he said, the yarn is in
skeins, now it must be boiled.  The woman was again
distressed, and said, yes, we will boil it to-morrow morning
early.  But she was secretly contriving another trick.
Early in the morning she got up, lighted a fire, and put the
kettle on, only instead of the yarn, she put in a lump of tow
and let it boil.  After that she went to the man who was
still lying in bed, and said to him, I must just go out, you
must get up and look after the yarn which is in the kettle on
the fire, but you must be at hand at once, mind that, for if
the cock should happen to crow, and you are not attending to
the yarn, it will become tow.  The man was willing and took
good care not to loiter.  He got up as quickly as he could,
and went into the kitchen.  But when he reached the kettle
and peeped in, he saw, to his horror, nothing but a lump of
tow.  Then the poor man was as still as a mouse, thinking
he had neglected it, and was to blame, and in future said
no more about yarn and spinning.  But you yourself must own
that she was an odious woman.
A peasant had a faithful horse which had grown old and could
do no more work, so his master would no longer give him
anything to eat and said, I can certainly make no more use
of you, but still I mean well by you, if you prove yourself
still strong enough to bring me a lion here, I will maintain
you, but now take yourself away out of my stable.  And with
that he chased him into the open country.  The horse was
sad, and went to the forest to seek a little protection there
from the weather.  Then the fox met him and said, why do you
hang your head so, and go about all alone.  Alas, replied the
horse, avarice and fidelity do not dwell together in one
house.  My master has forgotten what services I have
performed for him for so many years, and because I can no
longer plough well, he will give me no more food, and has
driven me out.  Without giving you a chance, asked the fox.
The chance was a bad one.  He said, if I were still strong
enough to bring him a lion, he would keep me, but he well
knows that I cannot do that.  The fox said, I will help you,
just lay yourself down, stretch yourself out as if you were
dead, and do not stir.  The horse did as the fox desired,
and the fox went to the lion, who had his den not far off,
and said, a dead horse is lying outside there, just come
with me, you can have a rich meal.  The lion went with
him, and when they
were both standing by the horse the fox said, after all, it
is not very convenient for you here - I tell you what - I
will fasten it to you by the tail, and then you can drag it
into your cave, and devour it in peace.
This advice pleased the lion, he lay down, and in order that
the fox might tie the horse fast to him, he kept quite quiet.
But the fox tied the lion's legs together with the horse's
tail, and twisted and fastened all so well and so strongly
that no strength could break it.  When he had finished his
work, he tapped the horse on the shoulder and said, pull,
white horse, pull.  Then up sprang the horse at once, and
drew the lion away with him.  The lion began to roar so
that all the birds in the forest flew out in terror, but
the horse let him roar, and drew him and dragged him over
the country to his master's door.  When the master saw the
lion, he was of a better mind, and said to the horse, you
shall stay with me and fare well, and he gave him plenty
to eat until he died.
The Lord God had created all animals, and had chosen out the wolf to
be his dog, but he had forgotten the goat.  Then the devil made
ready and began to create also, and created goats with fine long
tails.  Now when they went to pasture, they generally remained
caught in the hedges by their tails, whereupon the devil had to go
and disentangle them, with a great deal of trouble.  This enraged
him at last, and he went and bit off the tail of every goat, as may
be seen to this day by the stump.
Then he let them go to pasture alone, but it came to pass that the
Lord God perceived how at one time they gnawed away at a fruitful
tree, at another injured the noble vines, or destroyed other tender
plants.  This distressed him, so that in his goodness and mercy he
summoned his wolves, who soon tore in pieces the goats that went
there.  When the devil observed this, he went before the Lord and
said, your creatures have destroyed mine.  The Lord answered, why
did you create things to do harm.  The devil said, I was compelled
to do it, inasmuch as my thoughts run on evil.  What I
create can have no other nature, and you must pay me heavy damages.
I will pay you as soon as the oak leaves fall, come then, your money
will then be ready counted out.  When the oak-leaves had fallen, the
devil came and demanded what was due to him.  But the Lord said, in
the church of constantinople stands a tall oaktree which still has
all its leaves.  With raging and curses, the devil departed, and
went to seek the oak, wandered in the wilderness for six months
before he found it, and when he returned, all the oaks had in the
meantime covered themselves again with green leaves.  Then he had to
forfeit his indemnity, and in his rage he put out the eyes of all
the remaining goats, and put his own in instead.
This is why all goats have devil's eyes, and their tails bitten off,
and why he likes to assume their shape.
There was once a sorcerer who was standing in the midst of a
great crowd of people performing his wonders.  He had a cock
brought in, which lifted a heavy beam and carried it as if
it were light as a feather.  But a girl was present who had
just found a four-leaved clover, and had thus become so wise
that no deception could stand out against her, and she saw
that the beam was nothing but a straw.  So she cried, you
people, do you not see that it is a straw that the cock is
carrying, and no beam.  Immediately the enchantment vanished,
and the people saw what it was, and drove the magician away
in shame and disgrace.  He, however, full of inward anger,
said, I will soon revenge myself.
After some time the girl's wedding-day came, and she was
decked out, and went in a great procession over the fields to
the place where the church was.  All at once she came to a
stream which was very much swollen, and there was no bridge
and no plank to cross it.  Then the bride nimbly took her
clothes up, and wanted to wade through it.  And just as she
was thus standing in the water, a man, and it was the
sorcerer, cried mockingly close beside her, aha.  Where are
your eyes that you take that for water.  Then her eyes were
opened, and she saw that she was standing with her clothes
lifted up in the middle of a field that was blue with the
flowers of blue flax.  Then all the people saw it likewise,
and chased her away with ridicule and laughter.
There was once an old woman, but you have surely seen an old
woman go a-begging before now.  This woman begged likewise,
and when she got anything she said, may God reward you.  The
beggar-woman came to a door, and there by the fire a friendly
rogue of a boy was standing warming himself.  The boy said
kindly to the poor old woman as she was standing shivering
thus by the door, come, old mother, and warm yourself.  She
came in, but stood too near the fire, so that her old rags
began to burn, and she was not aware of it.  The boy stood
and saw that, but he ought to have put the flames out.  Is it
not true that he ought to have put them out.  And if he had
not any water, then he should have wept all the water in
his body out of his eyes, and that would have supplied two
pretty streams with which to extinguish them.
There was once on a time a maiden who was pretty, but idle
and negligent.  When she had to spin she was so out of
temper that if there was a little knot in the flax, she
at once pulled out a whole heap of it, and strewed it about
on the ground beside her.  Now she had a servant who was
industrious, and gathered together the bits of flax which
were thrown away, cleaned them, spun them fine, and had a
beautiful gown made out of them for herself.  A young man
had wooed the lazy girl, and the wedding was to take place.
On the eve of the wedding, the industrious one was dancing
merrily about in her pretty dress, and the bride said, ah,
how that girl does jump about, dressed in my hurds.
The bridegroom heard that, and asked the bride what she meant
by it.  Then she told him that the girl was wearing a dress
made of the flax which she had thrown away.  When the
bridegroom heard that, and saw how idle she was, and how
industrious the poor girl was, he gave her up and went to the
other, and chose her as his wife.
In the time of schlauraffen I went forth and saw rome and the
lateran hanging by a small silken thread, and a man without feet who
outran a swift horse, and a keen sharp sword that cut through a
bridge.  I saw a young ass with a silver nose which pursued two
fleet hares, and a lime-tree that was very large, on which hot cakes
were growing.  I saw a lean old goat which carried about a hundred
cart-loads of fat on his body, and sixty loads of salt.  Have I not
told enough lies.  I saw a plough ploughing without horse or cow,
and a child of one year threw four millstones from ratisbon to
treves, and from treves to strasburg, and a hawk swam over the
rhine, which he had a perfect right to do.  I heard some fishes
begin to make such a disturbance with each other, that it resounded
as far as heaven, and sweet honey flowed like water from a deep
valley to the top of a high mountain, and these were strange things.
There were two crows which were mowing a meadow, and I saw two gnats
building a bridge, and two doves tore a wolf to pieces, two children
brought forth two kids, and two frogs threshed corn
together.  I saw two mice consecrating a bishop, and two cats
scratching out a bear's tongue.  Then a snail came running up and
killed two furious lions.  There stood a barber and shaved a woman's
beard off, and two sucking-children bade their mother hold her
tongue.  There I saw two greyhounds which brought a mill out of the
water, and a broken-down old horse was beside it, and said it was
right.  And four horses were standing in the yard threshing corn
with all their might, and two goats were heating the stove, and a
red cow shot the bread into the oven.  Then a hen crowed,
cock-a-doodle-doo.  The story is all told, cock-a-doodle-doo.
I will tell you something.  I saw two roasted fowls flying,
they flew quickly and had their breasts turned to heaven and
their backs to hell, and an anvil and a mill-stone swam across
the rhine prettily, slowly, and gently, and a frog sat on
the ice at whitsuntide and ate a ploughshare.  Three fellows
who wanted to catch a hare, went on crutches and stilts, one
of them was deaf, the second blind, the third dumb, and the
fourth could not stir a step.  Do you want to know how it was
done.  First, the blind man saw the hare running across the
field, the dumb one called to the lame one, and the lame one
seized it by the neck.
There were certain men who wished to sail on dry land, and
they set their sails in the wind, and sailed away over great
fields.  Then they sailed over a high mountain, and there
they were miserably drowned.  A crab was chasing a hare which
was running away at full speed, and high up on the roof lay
a cow which had climbed up there.  In that country the flies
are as big as the goats are here.  Open the window that the
lies may fly out.
Three women were transformed into flowers which grew in
the field, but one of them was allowed to be in her own home at
night.  Then once when day was drawing near, and she was forced to
go back to her companions in the field and become a flower again,
she said to her husband, if you will come this afternoon and
gather me, I shall be set free and henceforth stay with you.  And
he did so.  Now the question is, how did her husband know her, for
the flowers were exactly alike, and without any difference.
Answer - as she was at her home during the night and not in the
field, no dew fell on her as it did on the others, and by this
her husband knew her.
How fortunate is the master, and how well all goes in his
house, when he has a wise servant who listens to his orders
and does not obey them, but prefers following his own wisdom.  A
clever Hans of this kind was once sent out by his master to seek a
lost cow.  He stayed away a long time, and the master thought,
faithful Hans does not spare any pains over his work.  But when
he did not come back at all, the master was afraid lest some
misfortune had befallen him, and set out himself to look for
him.  He had to search a long time, but at last he caught sight
of the boy running up and down a large field.  Now, dear Hans,
said the master when he had got up to him, have you found the cow
which I sent you to
seek.  No, master, he answered, I have not found the cow, but
then I have not looked for it.  Then what have you looked for,
Hans.  Three blackbirds, answered the boy.  And where are they,
asked the master.  I see one of them, I hear the other, and I
am running after the third, answered the wise boy.
Take example by this, do not trouble yourselves about your
masters or their orders, but rather do what comes into your
head and pleases you, and then you will act just as wisely as
clever Hans.
Once upon a time a poor pious peasant died, and arrived before
the gate of heaven.  At the same time a very rich, rich lord
came there who also wanted to get into heaven.  Then saint
peter came with the key, and opened the door, and let the
great man in, but apparently did not see the peasant, and shut
the door again.  And now the peasant outside heard how the
great man was received in heaven with all kinds of rejoicing,
and how they were making music, and singing within.  At length
all became quiet again, and saint peter came and opened the gate
of heaven, and let the peasant in.  The peasant, however,
expected that they would make music and sing when he went in
also, but all remained quite quiet.  He was received with great
affection, it is true, and the angels came to meet him, but no
one sang.  Then the peasant asked saint peter how it was that
they did not sing for him as they had done when the rich man
went in, and said that it seemed to him that there in heaven
things were done with just as much partiality as on earth.  Then
said saint peter, by no means, you are just as dear to us as
anyone else, and will enjoy every heavenly delight that the
rich man enjoys, but poor fellows like you come to heaven every
day, but a rich man like this does not come more than once in a
hundred years.
Lean lisa was of a very different way of thinking from lazy
harry and fat trina, who never let anything disturb their
peace.  She slaved away from morning till evening, and
burdened her husband, long laurence, with so much work that
he had heavier weights to carry than an ass with three sacks.
But it was
all to no purpose, for they had nothing and came to nothing.
One night as she lay in bed, and could hardly move one limb for
weariness, she still did not allow her thoughts to go to sleep.
She thrust her elbow into her husband's side, and said, listen,
lenz, to what I have been thinking.  If I were to find one florin
and one was given to me, I would borrow another to put to them,
and you too should give me another, and then as soon as I had
got the four florins together, I would buy a young cow.  This
pleased the husband right well.  It is true, said he, that I do
not know where I am to get the florin which you want as a gift
from me.  But, if you can get the money together, and can buy a
cow with it, you will do well to carry out your project.  I shall
be glad, he added, if the cow has a calf, and then I shall often
get a drink of milk to refresh me.  The milk is not for you, said
the woman, we must let the calf suck that it may become big and
fat, and we may be able to sell it well.  Certainly, replied the
man, but still we will take a little milk.  That will do no harm.
Who has taught you to manage cows,
said the woman.  Whether it does harm or not, I will not allow it,
and even if you were to stand on your head for it, you should not
have a drop of the milk.  Do you think, because there is no
satisfying you, long laurence, that you are to eat up what I earn
with so much difficulty.  Wife, said the man, be quiet, or I will
give you a blow on your mouth.  What, cried she, you threaten me,
you glutton, you rascal, you lazy harry.  She was just laying
hold of his hair, but long laurence got up, seized both lean
lisa's withered arms in one hand, and with the other he pressed
down her head into the pillow, let her scold, and held her until
she fell asleep for very weariness.  Whether she continued to
wrangle when she awoke next morning, or whether she went out to
look for the florin which she wanted to find, that I know not.
There was once a tailor, who was a quarrelsome fellow, and
his wife, who was good, industrious, and pious, never could
please him.  Whatever she did, he was not satisfied, but
grumbled and scolded, and knocked her about and beat her.  As
the authorities at last heard of it, they had him summoned
and put in prison in order to make him better.  He was kept
for a while on bread and water, and then set free again.  He
was forced, however, to promise not to beat his wife any
more, but to live with her in peace, and share joy and
sorrow with her, as married people ought to do.  All went
on well for a time, but then he fell into his old ways and
was surly and quarrelsome.  And because he dared not beat her,
he would seize her by the hair and tear it out.  The woman
escaped from him, and sprang out into the yard, but he ran
after her with his yard-measure and scissors, and chased her
about, and threw the yard-measure and scissors at her, and
whatever else came his way.  When he hit her he laughed, and
when he missed her, he stormed and swore.  This went on so long
that the neighbors came to the wife's assistance.  The tailor
was again summoned before the magistrates, and reminded of his
promise.  Dear gentlemen, said he, I have kept my word, I have
not beaten her, but have shared joy and sorrow with her.  How
can that be, said the judge, as she continues to bring such
heavy complaints against you.  I have not beaten her, but just
because she looked so strange I wanted to comb her hair with
my hand.  She, however, got away from me, and left me quite
spitefully.  Then I hurried after her, and in order to bring
her back to her duty, I threw at her as a well-meant reminder
whatever came readily to hand.  I have shared joy and sorrow
with her also, for whenever I hit her I was full of joy and
she of sorrow, and if I missed her, then she was joyful, and I
sorry.  The judges were not satisfied with this answer, but
gave him the reward he deserved.
In olden times every sound still had its meaning and significance.
When the smith's hammer resounded, it cried, "Strike away, strike
away."  When the carpenter's plane grated, it said, "Here goes, here
goes."  If the mill wheel began to clack, it said, "Help, Lord God,
help, Lord God."  And if the miller was a cheat and set the mill
a-going, it spoke high german, and first asked slowly, "Who is
there?  Who is there?"  And then answered quickly, "The miller,
the miller."  And at last quite in a hurry, "He steals bravely,
He steals bravely, three pecks in a bushel."

At this time the birds also had their own language which every
one understood.  Now it only sounds like chirping, screeching, and
whistling, and sometimes like music without words.  It came into
the birds' mind, however, that they would no longer be without a
ruler, and would choose one of themselves to be their king.  One
alone among them, the green plover, was opposed to this.  He
had lived free and would die free, and anxiously flying hither
and thither, he cried, "Where shall I go?  Where shall I go?"  He
retired into a solitary and unfrequented marsh, and showed himself
no more among his fellows.

The birds now wished to discuss the matter, and on a fine may
morning they all gathered together from the woods and fields,
eagles and chaffinches, owls and crows, larks and sparrows, how
can I name them all.  Even the cuckoo came, and the hoopoe, his
clerk, who is so called because he is always heard a few days
before him, and a very small bird which as yet had no name,
mingled with the band.  The hen, which by some accident had
heard nothing of the whole matter, was astonished at the great
assemblage.  What, what, what is going to be done, she cackled.
But the cock calmed his beloved hen, and said, only a lot of
rich people, and told her what they had on hand.  It was
decided that the one who could fly the highest should be king.
A tree-frog which was sitting among the bushes, when he heard
that, cried a warning, no, no, no, no, because he thought that
many tears would be shed because of this.  But the crow said, caw,
caw, and that all would pass off peaceably.

It was now determined that on this fine morning they should at
once begin to ascend, so that hereafter no one should be able
to say, I could easily have flown much higher, but the evening
came on, and I could do no more.  On a given signal, therefore,
the whole troop rose up in the air.  The dust ascended from the
land, and there was tremendous fluttering and whirring and
beating of wings, and it looked as if a black cloud was rising
up.  The little birds were soon left behind.  They could go no
farther, and fell back to the ground.  The larger birds held
out longer, but none could equal the
eagle, who mounted so high that he could have plucked the eyes
out of the sun.  And when he saw that the others could not get
up to him, he thought, why should you fly still higher.  You are
the king, and began to let himself down again.  The birds beneath
him at once cried to him, you must be our king, no one has flown
so high as you.  Except me, screamed the little fellow without a
name, who had crept into the breast-feathers of the eagle.  And
as he was not at all tired, he rose up and mounted so high that
he reached heaven itself.  However, when he had gone as far as
this, he folded his wings together, and called down with clear
and penetrating voice, I am king.  I am king.
You, our king, cried the birds angrily.  You have managed it
by trick and cunning.  So they made another condition.  He
should be king who could go down lowest in the ground.  How
the goose did flap about with its broad breast when it was once
more on land.  How quickly the cock scratched a hole.  The
duck came off the worst of all, for she leapt into a ditch,
but sprained her legs, and waddled away to a neighboring pond,
crying, cheating, cheating.  The little bird without a name,
however, sought out a mouse-hole, slipped down into it, and
cried out of it with his small voice, I am king.  I am king.
You our king, cried the birds still more angrily.  Do you
think your cunning shall prevail.  They determined to keep him
a prisoner in the hole and starve him out.  The owl was placed
as sentinel in front of it, and was not to let the rascal out
if she had any value for her life.  When evening was come and all
the birds were feeling very tired after the exertion of so much
flying, they went to bed with their wives and children.
The owl alone remained standing by the mouse-hole, gazing
steadfastly into it with her great eyes.  Then she, too, grew
tired and thought to herself, you might certainly shut one eye,
you will still watch with the other, and the little villain
shall not come out of his hole.  So she shut one eye,
and with the other looked straight at the mouse-hole.  The
little fellow put his head out and peeped, and wanted to slip
away, but the owl came forward immediately, and he drew his head
back again.  Then the owl opened the one eye again, and shut the
other, intending to shut them in turn all through the
night.  But when she next shut the one eye, she forgot to open
the other, and as soon as both her eyes were shut she
fell asleep.  The little fellow soon observed that, and slipped
away.
From that day forth, the owl has never dared to show herself by
daylight, for if she does the other birds chase her and pluck her
feathers out.  She flies out only by night, but hates and
pursues mice because they make such ugly holes.  The little
bird, too, is very unwilling to let himself be seen,
because he is afraid it will cost him his life if he is caught.
He steals about in the hedges, and when he is quite safe, he
sometimes cries, I am king, and for this reason, the other
birds call him in mockery, king of the hedges.  No one, however,
was so happy as the lark at not having to obey the little
king.  As soon as the sun appears, she ascends high in the air
and cries, ah, how beautiful that is.  Beautiful that is.
Beautiful'beautiful.  Ah, how beautiful that is.
The fishes had for a long time been discontented because no
order prevailed in their kingdom.  None of them turned
aside for the others, but all swam to the right or the left
as they fancied, or darted between those who wanted to
stay together, or got into their way.  And a strong one gave
a weak one a blow with its tail, which drove it away, or else
swallowed it up without more ado.  How delightful it would be,
said they, if we had a king who enforced law and justice among us,
and they met together to choose for their ruler the one who could
cleave through the water most quickly, and give help to the
weak ones.
They placed themselves in rank and file by the shore, and the
pike gave the signal with his tail, on which they all started.
Like an arrow, the pike darted away, and with him the herring,
the gudgeon, the perch, the carp, and all the rest of them.
Even the sole swam with them, and hoped to win the race.
All at once, the cry was heard, the herring is first, the
herring is first.  Who is first, screamed angrily the flat envious
sole, who had been left far behind,  who is first.  The herring,
the herring, was the answer.  The naked herring, cried the
jealous creature, the naked herring.  Since that time the sole
has been punished by having been given a mouth on one side.
Where do you like best to feed your flocks, said a man
to an old cowherd.  Here, sir, where the grass is neither
too rich nor too poor, or else it is no use.  Why not,
asked the man.  Do you hear that melancholy cry from the meadow
there, answered the cowherd, that is the bittern.  He was once
a cowherd, and so was the hoopoe also, I will tell you the
story.  The bittern pastured his flocks on rich green meadows where
flowers grew in abundance, so his cows became wild and unmanageable.
The hoopoe drove his cattle on to high barren hills, where the
wind plays with the sand, and his cows became thin, and got no
strength.  When it was evening, and the cowherds wanted
to drive their cows homewards, the bittern could not get his
together again.  They were too high-spirited, and ran away from
him.  He called, come, cows, come, but it was of no use.  They
took no notice of his calling.  The hoopoe, however, could not
even get his cows up on
their legs, so faint and weak had they become.  Up, up, up, screamed
he, but it was in vain, they remained lying on the sand.
That is the way when one has no moderation.  And to this day,
though they have no flocks now to watch, the bittern cries,
come, cows, come, and the hoopoe, up, up, up.
Two or three hundred years ago, when people were far from being so
crafty and cunning as they are nowadays, an extraordinary event
took place in a little town.  By some mischance one of the great
owls, called horned owls, had come from the neighboring woods into
the barn of one of the townsfolk in the night-time, and when day
broke did not dare to venture forth again from her retreat, for
fear of the other birds, which raised a terrible outcry whenever
she appeared.  In the morning when the man-servant went into the
barn to fetch some straw, he was so mightily alarmed at the sight
of the owl sitting there in a corner, that he ran away and
announced to his master that a monster, the like of which he had
never set eyes on in his life, and which could devour a man
without the slightest difficulty, was sitting in the barn, rolling
its eyes about in its head.  I know your kind, said the master,
you have courage enough to chase a blackbird about the fields, but
when you see a hen lying dead, you have to get a stick before you
go near it.  I must go and see for myself what kind of a monster
it is, added the master, and went quite boldly into the granary
and looked round him.  When, however, he saw with his own eyes
the strange grim creature, he was no less terrified than the
servant had been.  With two bounds he sprang out, ran to his
neighbours, and begged them imploringly to lend him assistance
against an unknown and dangerous beast, or else the whole town
might be in danger if it
were to break loose out of the barn, where it was shut up.  A
great noise and clamor arose in all the streets, the townsmen
came armed with spears, hay-forks, scythes, and axes, as if they
were going out against an enemy.  Finally, the senators appeared
with the burgomaster at their head.  When they had drawn up in
the market-place, they marched to the barn, and surrounded it on
all sides.  Thereupon one of the most courageous of them stepped
forth and entered with his spear lowered, but came running out
immediately afterwards with a shriek and as pale as death, and
could not utter a single word.  Yet two others ventured in, but
they fared no better.  At last one stepped forth, a great strong
man who was famous for his warlike deeds, and said, you will not
drive away the monster by merely looking at him, we must be in
earnest here, but I see that you have all tuned into women, and
not one of you dares to encounter the animal.  He ordered them
to give him some armor, had a sword and spear brought, and armed
himself.  All praised his courage, though many feared for his
life.  The two barn-doors were opened, and they saw the owl, which
in the meantime had perched herself on the middle of a great
cross-beam.  He had a ladder brought, and when he raised it, and
made ready to climb up, they all cried out to him that he was to
bear himself bravely, and commended him to St. George, who slew
the dragon.  When he had just got to the top, and the owl
perceived that he had designs on her, and was also bewildered by
the crowd and the shouting, and knew not how to escape, she
rolled her eyes, ruffled her feathers, flapped her wings,
snapped her beak, and cried, tuwhit, tuwhoo, in a harsh voice.
Strike home.  Strike home.  Screamed the crowd outside to the
valiant hero.  Any one who was standing where I am standing,
answered he, would not cry, strike home.  He certainly did plant
his foot one rung higher on the ladder, but then he began to
tremble, and half-fainting, went back again.
And now there was no one left who dared to place himself in such
danger.  The monster, said they, has poisoned and mortally
wounded the very strongest man among us, by snapping at him and
just breathing on him.  Are we, too, to risk our lives.  They took
counsel as to what they ought to do to prevent the whole town from
being destroyed.  For a long time everything seemed to be of no
use, but at length the burgomaster found an expedient.  My
opinion, said he, is that we ought, out of the common purse, to
pay for this barn, and whatsoever corn, straw, or hay it contains,
and thus indemnify the owner, and then burn down the whole
building and the terrible beast with it.  Thus no one will have to
endanger his life.  This is no time for thinking of expense,
and stinginess would be ill applied.  All agreed with him.  So
they set fire to the barn at all four corners, and with it the
owl was miserably burnt.  Let any one who will not believe it,
go thither and inquire for himself.
In days gone by there was a land where the nights were always dark,
and the sky spread over it like a black cloth, for there the moon
never rose, and no star shone in the gloom.  At the creation of
the world, the light at night had been sufficient.  Three young
fellows once went out of this country on a traveling expedition,
and arrived in another kingdom, where, in the evening when the sun
had disappeared behind the mountains, a shining globe was placed
on an oak-tree, which shed a soft light far and wide.  By means
of this, everything could very well be seen and distinguished,
even though it was not so brilliant as the sun.  The travelers
stopped and
asked a countryman who was driving past with his cart, what kind
of a light that was.  That is the moon, answered he, our mayor
bought it for three talers, and fastened it to the oak-tree.  He
has to pour oil into it daily, and to keep it clean, so that it
may always burn clearly.  He receives a taler a week from us
for doing it.
When the countryman had driven away, one of them said, we could
make some use of this lamp, we have an oak-tree at home, which is
just as big as this, and we could hang it on that.  What a
pleasure it would be not to have to feel about at night in the
darkness.  I'll tell you what we'll do, said the second, we will
fetch a cart and horses and carry away the moon.  The people here
may buy themselves another.  I'm a good climber, said the third, I
will bring it down.  The fourth brought a cart and horses, and the
third climbed the tree, bored a hole in the moon, passed a rope
through it, and let it down.  When the shining ball lay in the
cart, they covered it over with a cloth, that no one might observe
the theft.  They conveyed it safely into their own country, and
placed it on a high oak.  Old and young rejoiced, when the new
lamp let its light shine over the whole land, and bed-rooms and
sitting-rooms were filled with it.  The dwarfs came forth from
their caves in the rocks, and the tiny elves in their little red
coats danced in rings on the meadows.
The four took care that the moon was provided with oil, cleaned
the wick, and received their weekly taler, but they became old
men, and when one of them grew ill, and saw that he was about to
die, he appointed that one quarter of the moon, should, as his
property, be laid in the grave with him.  When he died, the mayor
climbed up the tree, and cut off a quarter with the hedge-shears,
and this was placed in his coffin.  The light of the moon
decreased, but still not visibly.  When the second died, the
second quarter was buried with him, and the light diminished.  It
grew weaker still after the death of the third, who likewise took
his part of it away with him, and when the fourth was borne to his
grave, the old state of darkness recommenced, and whenever the
people went out at night without their lanterns they knocked
their heads together in collision.
When, however, the pieces of the moon had united themselves
together again in the world below, where darkness had always
prevailed, it came to pass that the dead became restless and awoke
from their sleep.  They were astonished when they were able to
see again, the moonlight was quite sufficient for them, for their
eyes had become so weak that they could not have borne the
brilliance of the sun.  They rose up and were merry, and fell
into their former ways of living.  Some of them went to the play
and to dance, others hastened to the public-houses, where they
asked for wine, got drunk, brawled, quarreled, and at last took
up cudgels, and belabored each other.  The noise became greater and
greater, and at last reached even to heaven.
St. Peter, who guards the gate of heaven, thought the lower world
had broken out in revolt and gathered together the heavenly hosts,
which were employed to drive back the evil one when he and his
associates storm the abode of the blessed.  As these, however,
did not come, he got on his horse and rode through the gate of
heaven, down into the world below.  There he reduced the dead to
subjection, bade them lie down in their graves again, took the
moon away with him, and hung it up in heaven.
When God created the world and was about to fix the length of
each creature's life, the ass came and asked, Lord, how long shall
I live.  Thirty years, replied God, does that content you.  Ah,
Lord, answered the ass, that is a long time.  Think of my painful
existence.  To carry heavy burdens from morning to night, to drag
sacks of corn to the mill that others may eat bread, to be
cheered and refreshed with nothing but blows and kicks.  Relieve
me of a portion of this long time.  Then God had pity on him and
relieved him of eighteen years.  The ass went away comforted, and
the dog appeared.  How long would you like to live, said God to
him, thirty years are too many for the ass, but you will be
satisfied with that.  Lord, answered the dog, is that thy will.
Consider how I shall have to run, my feet will never hold out so
long, and when I have once lost my voice for barking, and my teeth
for biting, what will be left for me to do but run from one
corner to another and growl.  God saw that he was right, and
released him from twelve years of life.  Then came the monkey.
You will certainly live thirty years willingly, said the Lord to
him, you have no need to work as the ass and the dog have to, and
will always enjoy yourself.  Ah, Lord, he answered, it may seem
as if that were the case, but it is quite different.  When it
rains millet-porridge I have no spoon.  I am always to play merry
pranks, and make faces which force people to laugh, and if they
give me an apple, and I bite into it, why, it is sour.  How often
sadness hides itself behind mirth.  I shall never be able to hold
out for thirty years.  God was gracious and took off ten.
At last man appeared, joyous, healthy and vigorous, and begged
God to appoint his time for him.  Thirty years shall you live,
said the Lord.  Is that enough for you.  What a short time, cried
man, when I have built my house and my fire burns on my own
hearth, when I have planted trees which blossom and bear fruit,
and am just intending to enjoy my life, I am to die.  O Lord,
lengthen my time.  I will add to it the ass's eighteen years, said
God.  That is not enough, replied the man.  You shall also have
the dog's twelve years.  Still too little.  Well, then, said God,
I will give you the monkey's ten years also, but more you shall
not have.  The man went away, but was not satisfied.
So man lives seventy years.  The first thirty are his human
years, which are soon gone, then is he healthy, merry, works with
pleasure, and is glad of his life.  Then follow the ass's
eighteen years, when one burden after another is laid on him, he
has to carry the corn which feeds others, and blows and kicks are
the reward of his faithful services.  Then comes the dog's twelve
years, when he lies in the corner, and growls and has no longer
any teeth to bite with, and when this time is over the monkey's
ten years form the end.  Then man is weak-headed and foolish,
does silly things, and becomes the jest of children.
In ancient times a giant was once traveling on a great highway,
when suddenly an unknown man sprang up before him, and said,
halt, not one step farther.  What.  Cried the giant, a creature
whom I can crush between my fingers, wants to block my way.  Who
are you that you dare to speak so boldly.  I am death, answered
the other.  No one resists me, and you also must obey my commands.
But the giant refused, and began to struggle with death.  It was
a long, violent battle, in which at last the giant got
the upper hand, and struck death down with his fist, so that he
collapsed by a stone.  The giant went his way, and death lay there
conquered, and so weak that he could not get up again.  What will
be done now, said he, if I stay lying here in a corner.  No one
will die in the world, and it will get so full of people that they
won't have room to stand beside each other.  In the meantime a
young man came along the road, who was strong and healthy,
singing a song, and glancing around on every side.  When he saw
the half-fainting one, he went compassionately to him, raised him
up, poured a strengthening draught out of his flask for him, and
waited till he regained some strength.  Do you know, said the
stranger, whilst he was getting up, who I am, and who it is whom
you have helped on his legs again.  No, answered the youth, I do
not know you.  I am death, said he, I spare no one, and can make
no exception with you - but that you may see that I am grateful,
I promise you that I will not fall on you unexpectedly, but will
send my messengers to you before I come and take you away.  Well,
said the youth, it is something gained that I shall know when
you come, and at any rate be safe from you for so long.  Then he
went on his way, and was light-hearted, and enjoyed himself,
and lived
without thought.  But youth and health did not last long.  Soon
came sicknesses and sorrows, which tormented him by day, and took
away his rest by night.  Die, I shall not, said he to himself, for
death will send his messengers before that, but I do wish these
wretched days of sickness were over.  As soon as he felt
himself well again he began once more to live merrily.  Then one
day someone tapped him on the shoulder.  He looked round, and
death stood behind him, and said, follow me, the hour of your
departure from this world has come.  What, replied the man, will
you break your word.  Did you not promise me that you would send
your messengers to me before coming yourself.  I have seen none.
Silence, answered death.  Have I not sent one messenger to you
after another.  Did not fever come and smite you, and shake you,
and cast you down.  Has not dizziness bewildered your head.  Has
not gout twitched you in all your limbs.  Did not your ears sing.
Did not tooth-ache bite into your cheeks.  Was it not dark before
your eyes.  And besides all that, has not my own brother sleep
reminded you every night of me.  Did you not lie by night as if
you were already dead.  The man could make no answer, he yielded
to his fate, and went away with death.
Master pfriem was a short, thin, but lively man, who never
rested a moment.  His face, of which his turned-up nose was
the only prominent feature, was marked with smallpox and pale as
death.  His hair was gray and shaggy, his eyes small, but they
glanced perpetually about on all sides.  He saw everything,
criticized everything, knew everything best, and was always in
the right.  When he went into the streets, he moved his arms
about as if he were rowing, and once he struck the pail of a girl
so high in the air that he himself was wetted all over by the
water she was carrying.  Idiot.  Cried he to her, shaking
himself, could you not see that I was coming behind you.  By trade
he was a shoemaker, and when he worked he pulled his thread out
with such force that he drove his fist into everyone who did not
keep far enough off.  No apprentice stayed more than a month with
him, for he had always some fault to find with the very best work.
At one time it was that the stitches were not even, at another
that one shoe was too long, or one heel higher than the other,
or the leather not cut large enough.  Wait, said he to his
apprentice, I will soon show you how we make skins soft.  And
he brought a strap and gave him a couple of lashes across the
back.  He called them all sluggards.  He
himself did not turn much work out of his hands, for he never sat
still for a quarter of an hour.  If his wife got up very early in
the morning and lighted the fire, he jumped out of bed, and ran
barefooted into the kitchen, crying, will you burn my house down
for me.  That is a fire one could roast an ox by.  Does wood cost
nothing.  If the servants were standing by their wash-tubs and
laughing, and telling each other what they knew, he scolded them,
and said, there stand the geese cackling, and forgetting their
work, to gossip.  And why fresh soap.  Disgraceful extravagance
and shameful idleness into the bargain.  They want to save their
hands, and not rub the things properly.  And out he would run and
knock a pail full of soap and water over, so that the whole
kitchen was flooded.  Someone was building a new house, so he
hurrried to the window to look on.  There, they are using that
red sand-stone again that never dries, cried he.  No one will
ever be healthy in that house.  And just look how badly the
fellows are laying the stones.  Besides, the mortar is good for
nothing.  It ought to have gravel in it, not sand.  I shall live
to see that house tumble down on the people who are in it.
He sat down, put a couple of stitches in, and then jumped up
again, unfastened his leather-apron, and cried, I will just go
out, and appeal to those men's consciences.  He stumbled on the
carpenters.  What's this, cried he, you are not working by the
line.  Do you expect the beams to be straight - one wrong will
put all wrong.  He snatched an axe out of a carpenter's hand and
wanted to show him how he ought to cut, but as a cart loaded
with clay came by, he threw the axe away, and hastened to the
peasant who was walking by the side of it, you are not in your
right mind, said he, who yokes young horses to a heavily-laden
cart.  The poor beasts will die on the spot.  The peasant did
not give him an answer, and pfriem in a rage ran back into his
work-shop.  When he was setting himself to work again, the
apprentice reached him a shoe.  Well, what's that again, screamed
he, haven't I told you you ought not to cut shoes so broad.  Who
would buy a shoe like this, which is hardly anything else but a
sole.  I insist on my orders being followed exactly.  Master,
answered the apprentice, you may easily be quite right about the
shoe being a bad one, but it is the one which you yourself cut
out, and yourself set to work at.  When you jumped up a while
ago, you knocked it off the table, and I have only just picked it
up.  An angel from heaven, however, would never make you believe
that.
One night master pfriem dreamed he was dead, and on his way to
heaven.  When he got there, he knocked loudly at the door.  I
wonder, said he to himself, that they have no knocker on the door,
one knocks one's knuckles sore.  The apostle peter opened the door,
and wanted to see who demanded admission so noisily.  Ah, it's you
master pfriem, said he, well, I'll let you in, but I warn you
that you must give up that habit of yours, and find fault with
nothing you see in heaven, or you may fare ill.  You might have
spared your warning, answered pfriem.  I know already what is
seemly, and here, God be thanked, everything is perfect, and there
is nothing to blame as there is on earth.  So he went in, and
walked up and down the wide expanses of heaven.  He looked
around him, to the left and to the right, but sometimes shook his
head, or muttered something to himself.  Then he saw two angels
who were carrying away a beam.  It was the beam which someone had
had in his own eye whilst he was looking for the splinter in the
eye of another.  They did not carry the beam lengthways,
however, but obliquely.  Did anyone ever see such a piece of
stupidity, thought master pfriem.  But he said nothing, and seemed
satisfied with it.  It comes to the same thing after all,
whichever way they carry the beam, straight or athwart, if they
only get along with it, and truly I do not see them knock against
anything.  Soon after this he saw two angels who were drawing
water out of a well into a bucket, but at the same time he
observed that the bucket was full of holes, and that the water
was running out of it on every side.  They were watering the
earth with rain.  Hang it, he exclaimed, but happily recollected
himself, and thought, perhaps it is only a pastime.  If it is
an amusement, then it seems they can do useless things of this
kind, especially here in heaven, where people, as I have already
noticed, do nothing but idle about.  He went farther
and saw a cart which had stuck fast in a deep hole.  It's no
wonder, said he to the man who stood by, who would load so
unreasonably.  What have you there.  Good wishes, replied the man,
I could not get on the right way with it, but still I have pushed
it safely up here, and here they won't leave me stuck.  In fact
an angel did come and harness two horses to it.  That's quite
right, thought pfriem, but two horses won't get that cart out, it
must at least have four to it.  Another angel came and brought
two more horses, she did not harness them in front of it,
however, but behind.  That was too much for master pfriem, clumsy
creature, he burst out, what are you doing there.  Has anyone
ever since the world began seen a cart drawn in that way.  But
you, in your conceited arrogance, think that you know everything
best.  He was going to say more, but one of the inhabitants of
heaven seized him by the throat and pushed him forth with
irresistible strength.  Beneath the gateway master pfriem turned
his head round to take one more look at the cart, and saw that it
was being raised into the air by four winged horses.
At this moment master pfriem awoke.  Things are certainly
arranged in heaven otherwise than they are on earth, said he to
himself, and that excuses much, but who can see horses harnessed
both behind and before with patience.  To be sure they had wings
but who could know that.  It is, beside, great folly to fix a
pair of wings to a horse that has four legs to run with already.
But I must get up, or else they will make nothing but mistakes
in my house.  It is a lucky thing though, that I am not
really dead.
A tailor and a goldsmith were traveling together, and one evening
when the sun had sunk behind the mountains, they heard the sound
of distant music, which became more and more distinct.  It sounded
strange, but so pleasant that they forgot all their weariness
and stepped quickly onwards.  The moon had already arisen
when they reached a hill on which they saw a crowd of little men
and women, who had taken each other's hands, and were whirling
round in the dance with the greatest pleasure and delight.
They sang to it most charmingly, and that was the music which the
travelers had heard.  In the midst of them sat an old man who was
rather taller than the rest.  He wore a parti-colored coat, and his
hoary beard hung down over his breast.  The two remained standing
full of astonishment, and watched the dance.  The old man made
a sign that they should enter, and the little folks willingly opened
their circle.  The goldsmith, who had a hump, and like all
hunch-backs was daring enough, stepped in.  The tailor felt a little
afraid at first, and held back, but when he saw how merrily all
was going, he plucked up his courage, and followed.  The circle
closed again directly, and the little folks went on singing and
dancing with the wildest leaps.  The old man, however, took a
large knife which hung to his girdle, whetted it, and when it was
sufficiently sharpened, he looked round at the strangers.  They
were terrified, but they had not much time for reflection, for the
old man seized the goldsmith and with the greatest speed, shaved
the hair of his head clean off, and then the same thing happened to
the tailor.  But their fear left them when, after he had finished
his work, the old man clapped them both on the shoulder in a
friendly manner, as much as to say, they had behaved well to let
all that be done to them willingly, and without any struggle.  He
pointed with his finger to a heap of coals which lay at one side,
and signified to the travelers by his gestures that they were to
fill their pockets with them.  Both of them obeyed, although they
did not know of what use the coals would be to them, and
then they went on their way to seek a shelter for the night.
When they had got into the valley, the clock of the neighboring
monastery struck twelve, and the song ceased.  In a moment all had
vanished, and the hill lay in solitude in the moonlight.
The two travelers found an inn, and covered themselves up on their
straw-beds with their coats, but in their weariness forgot to take
the coals out of them before doing so.  A heavy weight on their
limbs awakened them earlier than usual.  They felt in the pockets,
and could not believe their eyes when they saw that they were not
filled with coals, but with pure gold.  Happily, too, the hair of
their heads and beards was there again as thick as ever.
They had now become rich folks, but the goldsmith, who, in
accordance with his greedy disposition, had filled his pockets
better, was twice as rich as the tailor.  A greedy man, even if he
has much,
still wishes to have more, so the goldsmith proposed to the tailor
that they should wait another day, and go out again in the evening
in order to bring back still greater treasures from the old man on
the hill.  The tailor refused, and said, I have enough and am
content.  Now I shall be a master, and marry my dear object -
for so he called his sweetheart - and I am a happy man.  But he
stayed another day to please him.  In the evening the goldsmith
hung a couple of bags over his shoulders that he might be able
to stow away a great deal, and took the road to the hill.  He
found, as on the night before, the little folks at their singing
and dancing, and the old man again shaved him clean, and made
signs to him to take some coal.  He was not slow about stuffing
as much into his bags as would go, went back quite delighted,
and covered himself over with his
coat.  Even if the gold does weigh heavily, said he, I will gladly
bear that, and at last he fell asleep with the sweet anticipation
of waking in the morning an enormously rich man.
When he opened his eyes, he got up in haste to examine his
pockets, but how amazed he was when he drew nothing out of them
but black coals, and that howsoever often he put his hands in
them.  The gold I got the night before is still there for me,
thought he, and went and brought it out, but how shocked he was when
he saw that it likewise had again turned into coal.  He smote his
forehead with his dusty black hand, and then he felt that his
whole head was bald and smooth, as was also the place where his
beard should have been.  But his misfortunes were not yet over.  He
now remarked for the first time that in addition to the
hump on his back, a second, just as large, had grown in front on
his breast.  Then he recognized the punishment of his
greediness, and began to weep aloud.  The good tailor, who was
awakened by this, comforted the unhappy fellow as well as he could,
and said, you have been my comrade in my traveling time.  You shall
stay with me and share in my wealth.  He kept his word, but the
poor goldsmith was obliged to carry the two humps as long as he
lived, and to cover his bald head with a cap.
A certain tailor who was great at boasting but ill at doing,
took it into his head to go abroad for a while, and look about
the world.  As soon as he could manage it, he left his
work-shop, and wandered on his way, over hill and dale,
sometimes hither, sometimes, thither, but ever on and on.  Once on
his way he perceived in the blue distance a steep hill, and behind
it a tower
reaching to the clouds, which rose up out of a wild dark forest.
Thunder and lightning, cried the tailor, what is that, and as he
was strongly goaded by curiosity, he went boldly towards it. But
how he did gaze and gape when he came near it, for the tower had
legs, and leapt in one bound over the steep hill, and was now
standing as an all-powerful giant before him.  What do you want here,
you tiny fly's leg, cried the giant, with a voice as if it were
thundering on every side.  The tailor whimpered, I want just to
look about and see if I can earn a bit of bread for myself, in
this forest.  If that is what you are after, said the giant,
you may have a place with me.  If it must be, why not.  What wages
shall I receive.  You shall hear what wages you shall have.  Every
year three hundred and sixty-five days, and when it is leap-year,
one more into the bargain.  Does that suit you.  All right,
replied the tailor, and thought, in his own mind, a man must cut
his coat according to his cloth.  I will try to get away as fast as
I can.
At this the giant said to him, go, little ragamuffin, and fetch
me a jug of water.  Had I not better bring the well itself
at once, and the spring too, asked the boaster, and went with the
pitcher to the water.  What, the well and the spring too, growled
the giant in his beard, for he was somewhat of a silly dolt, and
began
to be afraid.  That knave is not a fool, he has a mandrake in
his body.  Be on your guard, old Hans, this is no serving-man for
you.  When the tailor had brought the water, the giant bade
him go into the forest, and cut a couple of blocks of
wood and bring them back.  Why not the whole forest, at once,
with one stroke.  The whole forest, young and old, with
all that is there, both gnarled and smooth, and the well and its
spring too, growled the credulous giant in his beard, and was still
more terrified.  The knave can do much more than bake apples, and
has a mandrake in his body.  Be on your guard, old Hans, this is
no serving-man for you.  When the tailor had brought the wood, the
giant commanded
him to shoot two or three wild boars for supper.  Why not
rather a thousand at one shot, and bring them all here, inquired
the insolent tailor.  What, cried the timid giant in great terror.
Let well alone to-night, and lie down to rest.
The giant was so terribly alarmed that he could not close an
eye all night long for thinking what would be the best way to
get rid of this accursed sorcerer of a servant.  Time
brings counsel.  Next morning the giant and the tailor went to a
marsh, round which stood a number of willow-trees.  Then said
the giant, listen, tailor, seat yourself on one of the
willow-branches.  I long of all things to see if you are big enough
to bend it down.  All at once the tailor was sitting on it, holding
his breath, and making himself heavy, so heavy that the bough
bent down.  When, however, he was compelled to draw breath, it
hurled him - for unfortunately he had not put his goose in his
pocket - so high into the air that he never was seen again, and
this to the great delight of the giant.  If the tailor has not
fallen down again, he must still be hovering about in the air.
A merchant had done good business at the fair.  He had sold his
wares, and lined his money-bags with gold and silver.  Then he
wanted to travel homewards, and be in his own house before
nightfall.  So he packed his trunk with the money on his horse,
and rode away.
At noon he rested in a town, and when he wanted to go farther
the stable-boy brought out his horse and said, a nail is
wanting, sir, in the shoe of its near hind foot.  Let it be
wanting, answered the merchant.  The shoe will certainly stay on
for the six miles I have still to go.  I am in a hurry.
In the afternoon, when he once more alighted and had his horse
fed, the stable-boy went into the room to him and said, sir, a
shoe is missing from your horse's near hind foot.  Shall I take
him to the blacksmith.  Let it be wanting, answered the man.
The horse can very well hold out for the couple of miles which
remain.  I am in haste.
He rode forth, but before long the horse began to limp.  It had
not limped long before it began to stumble, and it had not
stumbled long before it fell down and broke its leg.  The
merchant was forced
to leave the horse where it was, and unbuckle the trunk, take it
on his back, and go home on foot.  And there he did not arrive
until quite late at night.  And that cursed nail, said he to
himself, has caused all this disaster.
The more haste the less speed.
This story, my dear young folks, seems to be false, but it really
is true, for my grandfather, from whom I have it, used always,
when relating it, to say, it must be true, my son, or else no
one could tell it to you.  The story is as follows.  One sunday
morning about harvest time, just as the buckwheat was in bloom,
the sun was shining brightly in heaven, the east wind was
blowing warmly over the stubble-fields, the larks were singing
in the air, the bees buzzing among the buckwheat, the people
in their sunday clothes were all going to church, and all creatures
were happy, and the hedgehog was happy too.
The hedgehog, however, was standing by his door with his arms
akimbo, enjoying the morning breezes, and slowly trilling a
little song to himself, which was neither better nor worse than
the songs which hedgehogs are in the habit of singing on a blessed
sunday morning.  Whilst he was thus singing half aloud to himself,
it suddenly occurred to him that, while his wife was washing and
drying the children, he might very well take a walk into the field,
and see how his turnips were getting on.  The turnips, in fact,
were close beside his house, and he and his family were accustomed
to eat them, for which reason he looked upon them as his own.
No sooner said than
done.  The hedgehog shut the house-door behind him, and took the
path to the field.  He had not gone very far from home, and
was just turning round the sloe-bush which stands there outside the
field, to go up into the turnip-field, when he observed the hare
who had gone out on business of the same kind, namely, to visit his
cabbages.  When the hedgehog caught sight of the hare, he bade him
a friendly good morning.  But the hare, who was in his own way a
distinguished gentleman, and frightfully haughty, did not return
the hedgehog's greeting, but said to him, assuming at the same
time a very contemptuous manner, how do you happen to be
running about here in the field so early in the morning.  I am
taking a walk, said the hedgehog.  A walk, said the hare, with
a smile.  It seems to me that you might use your legs for a better
purpose.  This answer made the hedgehog furiously angry, for he
can bear anything but a reference too his legs, just because they
are crooked by nature.  So now the hedgehog said to the hare, you
seem to imagine that you can do more with your legs than I with
mine.  That is just what I do think, said the hare.  That can
be put to the test, said the hedgehog.  I wager that if we run
a race, I will outstrip you.  That is ridiculous.  You with your
short legs, said the hare, but for my part I am willing, if you
have such a monstrous fancy for it.  What shall we wager.  A
golden louis-d'or and a bottle of brandy, said the hedgehog.  Done,
said the hare.  Shake hands on it, and then we may as well begin
at once.  Nay, said the hedgehog, there is no such great hurry.
I am still fasting, I will go home first, and have a little
breakfast.  In half-an-hour I will be back again at this
place.
Hereupon the hedgehog departed, for the hare was quite satisfied
with this.  On his way the hedgehog thought to himself, the hare
relies on his long legs, but I will contrive to get the better
of him.  He may be a great man, but he is a very silly fellow,
and he shall pay for what he has said.  So when the hedgehog
reached home, he said to his wife, wife, dress yourself quickly,
you must go out to the field with me.  What is going on, then,
said his wife.  I have made a wager with the hare, for a gold
louis-d'or and a bottle of
brandy.  I am to run a race with him, and you must be present.
Good heavens, husband, the wife now cried, are you not right in
your mind, have you completely lost your wits.  What can make
you want to run a race with the hare.  Hold your tongue, woman,
said the hedgehog, that is my affair.  Don't begin to discuss
things which are matters for men.  Be off, dress yourself, and
come with me.  What could the hedgehog's wife do.  She was forced
to obey him, whether she liked it or not.
So when they had set out on their way together, the hedgehog
said to his wife, now pay attention to what I am going to say.
Look you, I will make the long field our race-course.  The hare
shall run in one furrow, and when the hare arrives at the end
of the furrow on the other side of you, you must cry out to him,
I am here already.
Then they reached the field, and the hedgehog showed his wife
her place, and then walked up the field.  When he reached the
top, the hare was already there.  Shall we start, said the
hare.  Certainly, said the hedgehog.  Then both at once.  So
saying, each placed himself in his own furrow.  The hare counted,
once, twice, thrice, and away, and went off like a whirlwind
down the field.  The hedgehog, however, only ran about three
paces, and then he crouched down in the furrow, and stayed
quietly where he was.
When the hare therefore arrived at full speed at the lower end
of the field, the hedgehog's wife met him with the cry, I am
here already.  The hare was shocked and wondered not a little,
he thought no other than that it was the hedgehog himself who was
calling to him, for the hedgehog's wife looked just like her
husband.  The hare, however, thought to himself, that has not
been done fairly, and cried, it must be run again, let us have it
again.  And once more he went off like the wind in a storm, so
that he seemed to fly.  But the hedgehog's wife stayed quietly
in her place.  So when the hare reached the top of the field, the
hedgehog himself cried out to him, I am here already.  The
hare, however, quite beside himself
with anger, cried, it must be run again, we must have it again.
All right, answered the hedgehog, for my part we'll run as often
as you choose.  So the hare ran seventy-three times more, and
the hedgehog always held out against him, and every time the
hare reached either the top or the bottom, either the hedgehog
or his wife said, I am here already.
At the seventy-fourth time, however, the hare could no longer
reach the end.  In the middle of the field he fell to the
ground, blood streamed out of his mouth, and he lay dead on
the spot.  But the hedgehog took the louis-d'or which he had
won and the bottle of brandy, called his wife out of the furrow,
and both went home together in great delight, and if they are not
dead, they are living there still.
This is how it happened that the hedgehog made the hare run races
with him on the heath of buxtehude - buxtehude is a village near
hamburg - till he died, and since that time no hare has ever
had any fancy for running races with a buxtehude hedgehog.
The moral of this story is, firstly, that no one, however great
he may be, should permit himself to jest at any one beneath him,
even if he be only a hedgehog.  And, secondly, it teaches, that
when a man marries, he should take a wife in his own position,
who looks just as he himself looks.  So whosoever is a
hedgehog let him see to it that his wife is a hedgehog also,
and so forth.
There was once upon a time a far-sighted, crafty peasant whose
tricks were much talked about.  The best story, however, is
how he once got hold of the devil, and made a fool of him.
The peasant had one day been working in his field, and as
twilight had set in, was making ready for the journey home, when
he saw a heap of burning coals in the middle of his field,
and when,
full of astonishment, he went up to it, a little black devil
was sitting on the live coals.  Are you sitting upon a treasure,
said the peasant.  Yes, in truth, replied the devil, on a treasure
which contains more gold and silver than you have ever seen in
your life.  The treasure lies in my field and belongs to me, said
the peasant.  It is yours, answered the devil, if you will for
two years give me one half of everything your field produces.
Money I have enough, but I have a desire for the fruits of the
earth.  The peasant agreed to the bargain.  In order, however,
that no dispute may arise about the division, said he, everything
that is above ground shall belong to you, and what is under the
earth to me.  The devil was quite satisfied with that, but the
cunning peasant had sown turnips.
Now when the time for harvest came, the devil appeared and
wanted to take away his crop.  But he found nothing but the
yellow withered leaves, while the peasant, full of delight,
was digging up his turnips.  You have had the best of it for once,
said the devil, but the next time that won't do.  What grows
above ground shall be yours, and what is under it, mine.  I am
willing, replied the peasant.  But when the time came to sow, he
did not again sow turnips, but wheat.  The grain became ripe,
and the peasant went into the field and cut the full stalks
down to the ground.  When the devil came, he found nothing but
the stubble, and went away in a fury down into a cleft in the
rocks.  That is the way to cheat the devil, said the
peasant, and went and fetched away the treasure.
George one day said to his little chickens, come into the
parlor and enjoy yourselves, and pick up the bread-crumbs
on the table.  Your mistress has gone out to pay some visits.
Then the chickens said, no, no, we will not go.  If
the mistress gets to know it, she will beat us.  George said,
she will
know nothing about it.  So come.  After all, she never gives
you anything good.  Then the chickens again said, nay, nay, we
must let it alone.  We must not go.  But george let them have
no peace until at last they went, and got on the table, and ate
up the bread-crumbs with all their might.  But at that very moment
the mistress came, and seized the stick in great haste, and
beat them and treated them very harshly.  And when they were
outside the house, the chickens said to george, do, do, do, do,
do, you see.  Then george laughed and said, didn't, didn't, didn't,
I expect it.  So they just had to run away.
A rich farmer was one day standing in his yard inspecting his
fields and gardens.  The corn was growing up vigorously
and the fruit-trees were heavily laden with fruit.  The grain
of the year before still lay in such immense heaps in the loft that
the rafters could hardly bear it.  Then he went into the stable,
where were well-fed oxen, fat cows, and horses bright as
looking-glass.  At length he went back into his sitting-room, and
cast a glance at the iron chest in which his money lay.
Whilst he was thus standing surveying his riches, all at once there
was a loud knock close by him.  The knock was not at the door of
his room, but at the door of his heart.  It opened, and he heard
a voice which said to him, have you done good to your family with
it.  Have you considered the necessities of the poor.  Have you
shared your bread with the hungry.  Have you been contented with
what you have, or did you always desire to have more.  The heart
was not slow in answering, I have been hard and pitiless, and have
never shown any kindness to my own family.  If a beggar came, I
turned away my eyes from him.  I have not troubled myself about
God, but have thought only of increasing my wealth.  If everything
which the sky covers had been mine own, I should still not have
had enough.
When he was aware of this answer he was greatly alarmed, his
knees began to tremble, and he was forced to sit down.
Then there was another knock, but the knock was at the door of
his room.  It was his neighbor, a poor man who had a number of
children whom he could no longer satisfy with food.  I know, thought
the poor man, that my neighbor is rich, but he is as hard as he is
rich.  I don't believe he will help me, but my children are
crying for bread, so I will venture it.  He said to the rich man,
you do not readily give away anything that is yours, but I stand
here like one who feels the water rising above his head.  My
children are starving, lend me four measures of corn.  The rich man
looked at him long, and then the first sunbeam of mercy began to
melt away a drop of the ice of greediness.  I will not lend you
four measures, he answered.  I will make you a present of eight,
but you must fulfil one condition.  What am I to do, said the poor
man.  When I am dead, you shall watch for three nights by my
grave.  The peasant was disturbed in his mind at this request, but
in the need in which he was, he would have consented to anything.
He accepted, therefore, and carried the corn home with him.
It seemed as if the rich man had foreseen what was about to happen,
for when three days were gone by, he suddenly dropped down dead.
No one knew exactly how it came to pass, but no one grieved for him.
When he was buried, the poor man remembered his promise.  He
would willingly have been released from it, but he thought,
after all, he acted kindly by me.  I have fed my hungry children
with his corn, and even if that were not the case, where I have
once given my promise I must keep it.  At nightfall he went into
the churchyard, and seated himself on the grave-mound.  Everything
was quiet, only the moon appeared above the grave, and frequently
an owl flew past and uttered her melancholy cry.  When the sun
rose, the poor man betook himself in safety to his home, and in the
same manner the second night passed quietly by.  On the evening
of the third day he felt a strange uneasiness, it seemed to him that
something was about to happen.  When he went out he saw, by the
churchyard-wall, a man whom he had never seen before.  He
was no longer young, had scars on his face, and his eyes looked
sharply and eagerly around.  He was entirely covered with an old
cloak, and nothing was visible but his great riding-boots.  What
are you looking for here, the peasant asked.  Are you not afraid
of the lonely churchyard.
I am looking for nothing, he answered, and I am afraid of
nothing.  I am like the youngster who went forth to learn how to
shudder, and had his labor for his pains, but got the king's
daughter to wife and great wealth with her, only I have remained
poor.  I am nothing but a paid-off soldier, and I mean to pass
the night here, because I have no other shelter.  If you are without
fear, said the peasant, stay with me, and help me to watch that
grave there.
To keep watch is a soldier's business, he replied, whatever we
fall in with here, whether it be good or bad, we will share it
between us.  The peasant agreed to this, and they seated themselves
on the grave together.
All was quiet until midnight, when suddenly a shrill whistling
was heard in the air, and the two watchers perceived the evil one
standing bodily before them.  Be off, you scoundrels, cried he to
them, the man who lies in that grave belongs to me.  I want to
take him, and if you don't go away I will wring your necks.  Sir
with the red feather, said the soldier, you are not my captain,
I have no need to obey you, and I have not yet learned what fear
is.  Go away, we shall stay sitting here.
The devil thought to himself, money is the best means with which
to lay hold of these two vagabonds.  So he began to play a
softer tune, and asked quite kindly, if they would not accept
a bag of money, and go home with it.  That is worth listening
to, answered the soldier, but one bag of gold won't serve us.  If
you will give as much as will go into one of my boots, we will quit
the field for you and go away.
I have not so much as that about me, said the devil, but I will
fetch it.  In the neighboring town lives a money-changer who is a
good friend of mine, and will readily advance it to me.  When the
devil had vanished the soldier took his left boot off, and said,
we will soon pull the charcoal-burner's nose for him, just give me
your knife, comrade.  He cut the sole off the boot, and put it
in the high grass near the grave on the edge of a hole that was
half over-grown.  That will do, said he.  Now the chimney-sweep
may come.
They both sat down and waited, and it was not long before the
devil returned with a small bag of gold in his hand.  Just pour
it in, said the soldier, raising up the boot a little, but that
won't be enough.
The black one shook out all that was in the bag.  The gold fell
through, and the boot remained empty.  Stupid devil, cried the
soldier, it won't do.  Didn't I say so at once.  Go back again, and
bring more.  The devil shook his head, went, and in an hour's
time came with a much larger bag under his arm.  Now pour it in,
cried the soldier, but I doubt the boot will be full.  The gold
clinked as it fell, but the boot remained empty.  The devil looked
in himself with his burning eyes, and convinced himself of the
truth.  You have shamefully big calves to your legs, cried he,
and made a wry face.  Did you think, replied the soldier, that I had
a cloven foot like  you.  Since when have you been so stingy.  See
that you get more gold together, or our bargain will come to
nothing.  The wicked one went off again.  This time he stayed
away longer, and when at length he appeared he was panting under
the weight of a sack which lay on his shoulders.  He emptied it into
the boot, which was just as far from being filled as before.  He
became furious, and was just going to tear the boot out of the
soldier's hands, but at that moment the first ray of the rising
sun broke forth from the sky, and the evil spirit fled away with
loud shrieks.  The poor soul was saved.
The peasant wished to divide the gold, but the soldier said,
give what falls to my lot to the poor, I will come with you to your
cottage, and together we will live in rest and peace on what
remains, as long as God is pleased to permit.
A soldier who is afraid of nothing, troubles himself about
nothing.  One of this kind had received his discharge, and
as he had learnt no trade and could earn nothing, he traveled
about and begged alms of kind people.  He had an old rain-coat
on his back, and a pair of riding-boots of buffalo-leather which
were still left to him.  One day he was walking he knew not where,
straight out into the open country, and at length came to a forest.
He did not know where he was, but saw sitting on the trunk of a
tree, which had been cut down, a man who was well dressed and
wore a green shooting-coat.  The soldier shook hands with him, sat
down on the grass by his side, and stretched out his legs.  I see
you have good boots on, which are well blacked, said he to the
huntsman, but if you had to travel about as I have, they would
not last long.  Look at mine, they are of buffalo-leather, and
have been worn for a long time, but in them I can go through thick
and thin.  After a while the soldier got up and said, I can stay
no longer, hunger drives me onwards, but, brother brightboots,
where does this road lead to.  I don't know that myself, answered
the huntsman, I have lost my way in the forest.  Then you are in the
same plight as I, said the soldier.  Birds of a feather flock
together, let us remain together, and seek our way.  The huntsman
smiled a little, and they walked on further and further, until
night fell.  We do not get out of the forest, said the soldier,
but there in the distance I see a light shining.  There we might
find something to eat.  They found a stone house, knocked at the
door, and an old woman opened it.  We are looking for quarters for
the night, said the soldier, and some lining for our stomachs, for
mine is as empty as
an old knapsack.  You cannot stay here, answered the old woman.
This is a robbers, house, and you would do wisely to get away
before they come home, or you will be lost.  It won't be so bad
as that, answered the soldier, I have not had a mouthful for two
days, and whether I am murdered here or die of hunger in the
forest is all the same to me.  I shall come in.  The huntsman
would not follow, but the soldier drew him in with him by the
sleeve.  Come, my dear brother, we shall not come to an end so
quickly as that.  The old woman had pity on them and said, creep
in here behind the stove, and if they leave anything, I will give
it to you on the sly when they are asleep.  Scarcely were they in
the corner before twelve robbers came bursting in, seated themselves
at the table which was already laid, and vehemently demanded some
food.  The old woman brought in some great dishes of roast meat,
and the robbers enjoyed that thoroughly.  When the soldier smelled
the food, he said to the huntsman, I cannot hold out any
longer, I shall seat myself at the table, and eat with them.  You
will bring us to destruction, said the huntsman, and held him back
by the arm.  But the soldier began to cough loudly.  When the
robbers heard that, they threw away their knives and forks, leapt
up, and discovered the two who were behind the stove.  Aha,
gentlemen, are you in the corner, cried they.  What are you doing
here.  Have you been sent as spies.  Wait a while, and you shall
learn how to
fly on a dry bough.  But do be civil, said the soldier, I am
hungry, give me something to eat, and then you can do what you
like with me.  The robbers were astonished, and the captain said,
I see that you have no fear.  Well, you shall have some food,
but after that you must die.  We shall see, said the soldier, and
seated himself at the table, and began to cut away valiantly at the
roast meat.  Brother brightboots, come and eat, cried he to the
huntsman.  You must be as hungry as I am, and cannot have better
roast meat at home, but the huntsman would not eat.  The robbers
looked at the soldier in astonishment, and said, the rascal uses
no ceremony.  After a while he said, I have had enough food, now
get me something good to drink.  The chief of the robbers was
in the mood to humor him in this also, and called to the old
woman, bring a bottle out of the cellar, and mind it be of the
best.  The soldier drew the cork out with a loud noise, and then
went with the bottle to the huntsman and said, watch this, brother,
and you shall see something that will surprise you.  I am now going
to drink the health of the whole clan.  Then he brandished the
bottle over the heads of the robbers, and cried, long life to
you all, but with your mouths open and your right hands lifted
up, and then he drank a hearty draught.  Scarcely were the
words said than they all sat motionless as if made of stone,
and their mouths were open and their right hands stretched up in
the air.  The huntsman said to the soldier, I see that you are
acquainted with tricks of another kind, but now come and let us
go home.  Oho, my dear brother, but that would be marching
away far too soon.  We have conquered the enemy, and must first
take the booty.  Those men there are sitting fast, and are opening
their mouths with astonishment, but they will not be allowed to
move until I permit them.  Come, eat and drink.  The old woman
had to bring another bottle of the best wine, and the soldier would
not stir until he had eaten enough to last for three days.  At
last when day came, he said, now it is time to strike our tents,
and in order that our march may be a short one, the old woman
shall show us the nearest way to the town.

When they had arrived there, he went to his old comrades, and
said, out in the forest I have found a nest full of gallows,
birds, come with me and we will take it.  The soldier led them,
and said to the huntsman, you must go back again with me to see
how they flutter when we seize them by the feet.  He placed
the men round about the robbers, and then he took the bottle,
drank a mouthful, brandished it above them, and cried, long life
to you all.  Instantly they all regained the power of movement,
but were thrown down and bound hand and foot with cords.
Then the soldier ordered them to be thrown into a cart as if
they had been so many sacks, and said, now drive them straight
to prison.  The huntsman, however, took one of the men aside
and gave him another commission as well.

Brother brightboots, said the soldier, we have safely routed
the enemy and been well fed, now we will quietly walk behind
them as if we were stragglers.  When they approached the town,
the soldier saw a crowd of people pouring through the gate of
the town who were raising loud cries of joy, and waving green
boughs in the air.  Then he saw that the entire body-guard was
coming up.  What can this mean, said he to the huntsman.

Don't you know, he replied, that the king has for a long time
been absent from his kingdom, and that today he is returning,
and every one is going to meet him.  But where is the king,
said the soldier.  I do not see him.  Here he is, answered
the huntsman, I am the king, and have announced my arrival.

Then he opened his hunting-coat, and his royal garments were
visible.  The soldier was alarmed, and fell on his knees and
begged him to forgive him for having in his ignorance treated
him as an equal, and spoken to him by such a name.  But the
king shook hands with him, and said, you are a brave soldier,
and have saved my life.  You shall never again be in want,
I will take care of you.  And if ever you would like to eat
a piece of roast meat, as good as that in the robber's house,
come to the royal kitchen.  But if you would drink a health,
you must first ask my permission.


In the winter time, when deep snow lay on the ground, a poor boy 
was forced to go out on a sledge to fetch wood.  When he had 
gathered it together, and packed it, he wished, as he was so 
frozen with cold, not to go home at once, but to light a fire and
warm himself a little.  So he scraped away the snow, and as he 
was thus clearing the ground, he found a tiny golden key.  
Hereupon he thought that where the key was, the lock must be 
also, and dug in the ground and found an iron chest.  "If the
key does but fit it!"  thought he; "no doubt there are precious
things in that little box."  He searched, but no keyhole was
there.  At last he discovered one, but so small that it was
hardly visible.  He tried it, and the key fitted it exactly.
Then he turned it once round, and now we must wait until he has
quite unlocked it and opened the lid, and then we shall learn
what wonderful things were lying in that box. 





Ambivalence
by Ben Greenman


When a girl is skinny, and calls you late at night, and you glance at the calendar, and it is four days before you are scheduled to get mar- ried, and the girl you are marrying is not the skinny girl but another girl, a girl who has already departed for the city where your wedding is to be held, it is your job, most probably, to hang up the phone. When you do not hang up the phone, you have not done your job. When you invite that skinny girl to your apartment, and then you jump into the shower so that you will be clean, taking special trouble to wash the parts that matter, and then you mess up your hair so that you will look as though you havent gone to any special trouble, then you are doing another job entirely.
She was a painter. Panos met her through a mutual friend. She had a boyfriend, who was twenty-two years older than she, and when Panos first spoke to her, he said that he thought that the age differ- ence was an atrocity. Like bombing Cambodia, he said, convinced that this was a joke that she would not understand. She surprised him with a knowing laugh. They talked about his impending mar- riage, and about the week of freedom he had but doubted hed use. She took out a Paper-Mate blue pen and used it to write his phone number on her hand. She wrote it strangely: not with numerals, but with letters O for 1, T for 2, TH for 3,  F,  FI,  and so  on.  So that makes your number Efstooth, she said.


Hey, Panos said. Thats my street: Efstooth Avenue.
For that joke I award you this pen, she said, handing it over ceremonially. Ill get it later.
When she arrived at Panoss apartment, Efstooth was still inked on her hand, but that was not the first thing he noticed. The first thing he noticed was that she was carrying a suitcase. It was small enough that she held it rather than setting it down, but large enough that it seemed to have winded her slightly on the way up to the third floor.
Are you moving in? he said. I dont know how my wife will feel about this. She set the suitcase down on the floor, unzipped it, and flipped back the top. There were white packages there, white sheets, and when she unwrapped them they were her paintings. She spread them out on the floor of his apartment. There were ten of them, each one a small landscape with a single bird flying over a marsh and a single human figure in the foreground. They were slightly different shades, one reddish, one greenish, one dunnish, and so on, across a muted spectrum.
Panos looked at the paintings and asked polite questions about them that she answered smoothly. I like to tell people that hes trying to capture the bird, she said. I always feel hilarious saying that. But the birds not an unwitting victim. He sees the man. You can be sure about that. When he asked if they were all pictures of the same scene, she said that she saw how hed think so but that no, three of them were painted from actual photographs of her father hunting and the other seven were created from imagination. My father left when I was a little girl, she said. I remember that he yelled a lot, and that he was mean to my mother, and that she was happier with- out him. But recently I have been looking for pictures of him. I found three and made up seven more. No one should have fewer than ten photographs of her father.
They turned the TV on but turned the volume all the way down. They ordered pizza. She sat in a chair across the room from him, and announced that she hadnt showered that morning, because the water in her apartment was too cold. Panos told her she was welcome to take a shower if she wanted. Well see, she said, and went around


the apartment ticking her finger across the spine of books. Lots of history books, she said.
Not mine, Panos said.
Oh, she said. Too bad. I love history books. She was wearing tight stretch pants and a tight white shirt. It was obvious to Panos that she was the skinniest girl who had ever been in his apartment. She was not wearing a bra, which put her in the company of at least two other girls who had been in the apartment, neither of whom was the girl who was, in four days time, going to be his wife. His wife always wore a bra, and even three years into their relationship, she gave a little involuntary gasp of pleasure whenever he unclasped it. He figured that it was, at best, a reflex. The history books were hers.
The skinny girl came and stood right next to Panos. She planted her feet to make it clear that she was ready to address the issue.
Well, Panos said. Here we are.
We are here, she said. No doubt about that.
Its all in the way you say it, he said. Here we are is more loaded than we are here.
Is that what we are? Loaded? she said. Speaking of which, Ill have more wine. She shook her glass and sloshed out a few drops onto her shirt. Shit, she said.
I have extra T-shirts, Panos said.
Ill just take this off, she said, and did. Come here, Panos said.
She sat on the couch and pushed up alongside him. They watched the TV, which was showing a strongman competition. A fat Swede was jogging down a short track, the chassis of a car held on his shoul- ders. I really stink, she said. Panos closed his eyes for research. She was right, in a way: it was the smell of young sweat, of a black flower blooming. She unbuttoned his shirt and laid her head on his chest.
Now youve got me thinking about my father, she said. I do? Panos said. How?
Its not that hard to do.
I dont think I like your tone, he said.
Im sure you dont, she said. No one ever does. She squeezed his arm. You know what my father did? Other than leave, I mean.


And hunt.
And hunt. No, I mean what he did for work. He was trained as a lawyer but about a year before I was born he quit to work on a biogra- phy of his great-grandfather, who was a British intelligence agent who specialized in code breaking. Do you know about the Zimmermann Telegram? Panos shook his head. She didnt continue right away.  He put his hand on her stomach, and then slipped a few fingers just inside the elastic band of her pants.
Tell me, Panos  said. What? she said after a while. Tell me about the telegram.
Oh, she said. Why? Are you really interested? Panos nodded and let one finger drift a little lower. Of course you are, she said.
Really, Panos said. Keep telling me about it.
Fine, she said. This telegram was sent from the German foreign secretary to the German ambassador in Mexico, and it announced that the Germans were going to support a Mexican attack on the southwestern United States. The British, including my great-great- grandfather, cracked the code. When the telegram was verified, Wilson armed ships to defend against Germany, and a few days after that, we were at war. World War One.
You know, even though the history books arent mine, I managed to figure that out.
The code was a cryptogram. We cracked it partly because one of the top German spies, Wilhelm Wassmuss, had lost his codebook in Iran the year before. We picked that up and it helped with the Zim- mermann Telegram.
We?
Now she didnt like his tone. We the British. We my great-great- grandfather. The strongman competition had ended, and now the TV was showing dirt bike racing. She got up to go to the bathroom, and when she came back she started to pack her paintings back into the suitcase. What color would you say this is? she said, holding up a canvas.
Blue.
And what about this one?


Also blue.
Right. But isnt that ridiculous? Two colors that are so different, but theyre considered the same. Its almost reason enough to become a painter, just to try to understand that. Colors are like a code, too.
Oh, yeah, Panos said. Finish the code story.
It was finished, she said. Finished enough. I was out of that and on to color. Blame your bathroom. Its blue.
I didnt pick that color.
It doesnt look like your thing, she said. When are you getting married?
Sunday, Panos said. Its strange. It seems like a million years away, and also like its going to happen the first time I let myself breathe.
Youre not breathing? Not always well.
Is it because I stink?
Its because Im not sure what message Ill be sending if I do.
Maybe my true feelings will come through.
What are those true feelings? I assume they have something to do with the reason Im here. She had her chin tilted up now, and her words were falling into the space between them.
Ambivalence.
Thats not a feeling. Its the presence of two feelings at once.
What are the two?
Joy and fear? Happiness and hatred? Rightness and wrongness? Wrongness?
The most obvious kind of wrongness. Like maybe this isnt the right choice. Like there are a million people to love, and how can I settle on one and be sure that Im not a fool? I have met others. I might meet others. What about Eskimos?
The Eskimos, she said. Of course.
Or the Finns or the Malays or all the other people I dont even know about. Maybe I could be with one of them without ambiva- lence. Dont you have these questions about your boyfriend?
Hes a quick story. Hes older, is big like you, has a beard, helps pay the rent on my painting studio, treats me with what well say is


kind contempt. That often does the trick for me, as it turns out. She slipped a hand inside his shirt and hooked her leg over his. Will you kiss me?
Sure, Panos said. But Im not sure about more. I want to, but you know.
Now thats ambivalence, she said. After they kissed, she pulled her pants down far enough to show him that she wasnt wearing any underwear. Put your hands on my ass.
If you insist, Panos said. But I want you to know that I feel like I could stop any time.
Im flattered, she said, her eyes narrowing.
What I was going to say, Panos said, is that its like when a drunk driver thinks that hes in control of his car.
Oh, she said. Maybe I am flattered. Well, do what you want,     or dont. Your hours are numbered anyway. I have told you so many state secrets that Im going to have to kill you. Anyway, its not too long until morning. Ill be gone soon. They leaned into each other and she pretended to concentrate on the dirt bikes on TV.
The sky outside was already starting to change color, from black to a weaker shade of black. There wasnt any blue in it yet. Theres    a bird out there, Panos said. I rarely actually see them at night.
The man sees the bird, she said. You can be sure about that. She made birds with her hands and flew them up high so that her arms were stretching as far as they would go. She was so skinny that there was something painfully religious about that pose. It was a pose of appeal to something far beyond him. Put your head back down on me, she said, and he did. She stroked his neck, unbuttoned his pants, made circles with her fingers on his stomach, exhibited restraint. Taking off her clothes would have been as easy as asking. How often are things as easy as asking?
At seven, it was time for her to go. Panos found her shirt and but- toned up his own. Okay, he said. Whats the way to do this? He hadnt anticipated the need for any secrecy. He had planned to sneak her out at three in the morning or so. But now his neighbors were  up, and many of them knew his wife, and he wasnt sure what they would make of a strange skinny girl leaving his apartment early in the morning.


Ill go down and throw out the trash, he said. If I buzz on the buzzer, that means the coast is clear, so come downstairs quick. The door will lock behind you.
Okay, she said. Can you carry my suitcase along with a trash bag? That way I can get there fast. I wont have to bump around on the stairs.
Its like being a spy, Panos said.
Its nothing like that, she said. I could tell you stories.
Did Panos take her to breakfast? Not to take her would have been rude. But he did not pay. That would have been too conspiratorial, and too high-handed, both at once. Besides, he was not hungry, just intensely thirsty, enough so that he bought a half-gallon of orange juice from the corner store and drank it straight from the carton while he stood out on the sidewalk. She stopped in a coffee shop and ordered a toasted bagel; a bit of melted butter ran down her chin when she ate it. Her chin was slick with the butter. The sky was a brilliant shade of blue. At that mument, just at that precise mument, he wanted to invite her back up to his apartment and make all the mistakes he had avoided making. Instead he changed the subject, for the last time. You forgot to get your pen back, he said.
You can keep it, she said. Remember me by it. Thats kind of nice, right, to remember someone by something totally anonymous? When you write with it, itll be like theres an invisible ink message just under the real message.
What does it say?
You wouldnt understand, she said. Its in Inuktitut. What is that?
Look it up, she said. You have books. Ive  seen  them.  Okay: Im leaving.
See you, Panos said.
Or not, she said. Probably not.
Well, he said, I hope you enjoyed your time on Efstooth Avenue.
Youre an idiot, she said. When she leaned in to kiss him good- bye he smelled it again, the black flower blooming under her arm. He went back to his apartment and pulled out history books until he found a listing in the index for the Zimmermann Telegram. He


read a few paragraphs that he didnt understand. They might as well have been in Inuktitut. In the front of the book, on a f lyleaf, his wife had signed her name. His wife, almost. He shut the book hard, like a trap. He was trying to capture his ambivalence or kill it. Three days later, he watched his wife sign her name again, on a marriage certificate, beneath a paragraph he understood completely. The ink and sky were blue.






When Amy hears what her father has done, she thinks she is having a heart attack.
Are you sure? she asks her mother, who is out of state in Amys childhood home. Amy is talking loudly because of the din of the lawnmower going at it next door.
Her mother screams Goddamn it and hangs up the phone on Amy. Thats when Amy thinks she feels the heart attack give birth to itself. Her whole left breast aches underneath where she suspects her heart is. Amy tries calling her mother back but she will not answer and the heart attack lightning-bolts her. It isnt at all what she thinks a heart attack will feel like.
Let it be over quickly, she says. When there is no response, Amy answers herself: Okay.
Amy caresses her breast, since she cant get to her heart, and it feels good; no, it feels better, but good that she can take care of things herself, with husband and children at school. She thinks about how things could have been so different. She could have married that rabbi, freshly ordained, he wanted to marry her, and then there was that doctor, a heart doctor, now is that some shade of apropos or what, but he dumped Amy for a famous actress person, thirty years his senior. So Amy married Ralph instead and she hates him and hates this marriage, and he is always screaming how he hates her, too,


and how that time she called 911 because he was screaming so badly and they told her that they could only send someone out if he hit her or threatened to hit her. She wondered if 911 would come out if she thinks it is a heart attack but isnt really sure. Or if they would tell her mother to stop hanging up on her all the time.
Amy likes the word tits but only in private, and only when she is by herself. She takes off her shirt to undo her bra and now that it is undone, she lifts it up and off her shoulders. Sensing their immedi- ate release, Amy uses two hands to caress and cajole. Her breasts are loopy and long, having stretched out beside  themselves after years of expensive but essentially nonsupport bras. She considers turning some music on for mood but that would require the effort of getting up and the only effort Amy wants is the one right now on her breasts. She sings to herself instead, trying to drown out the mowers. Living in a gated community in the suburbs the lawns and gardens of the big expansive homes are always being fussed over.
Amy has all but forgotten about the pending heart attack. Her fingers deftly follow the vein down the one breast that starts in the middle of nowhere. The fingers have gone this route before. She is feeling the rise of her chest and the boldness of her C-cups elongated as they hang out with her since her mother hung up on her today. She doesnt care if Ralph wants her to have a boob job; hes got enough D-cups in his porn collection to start a new nation. These girls are not fixer-uppers, Amy always says.
Amy goes from the middle of nowhere vein all the way down to the nipple. When she was nursing her youngest many years agothe swell of time bruised and bloatedher older child asked about the breast- feeding. He was precocious enough to be in a gifted-and-talented kin- dergarten class where he was learning his colors in Espaol. As she began to give him the beautiful explanation of the breast as nourisher, he exhaled words as if they were mucous he wanted to get rid of. No, whats THAT? That blue thing, he snaked, on your boob. Amy looked down at the vein. Its gross! he screamed. mummys got blue boobs. She had to explain to Ralph that she didnt show him her boob, he looked.
The phone rings. When she hears her mothers voice on the an-


swering machine, Amys fingers let go of the breasts. Why did you hang up on me? Amy asks. Her bra looks funny, hanging half on the kitchen chair. Half off. Which one is it really? You know I dont like when you hang up on me. The chair almost looks like it is wear- ing the bra in a very revealing way. Amys daughter, the youngest, recently wondered why nobody thought to dress up furniture beyond the fabric of cushions or pillows. It would be funny to see a sofa wearing a dress. A love seat could wear a skirt and a pair of pants because its a love seat and it could be a boy and a girl together. Of course, it could be a girl and a girl or a boy and a boy, too, refer- ring to her aunt, Amys sister, and her wife. This child was gifted and talented, too.
What do you mean asking me, her mother snipped into the phone, am I sure? Im right here. Youre not here. Youre all the way there. Exactly what part do you think I am not sure about?
Its just that . . . , Amy stutters.
Your father embezzled from a client, her mother says, reaching pitches not previously thought possible. He got caught. It doesnt matter to them that he was going to pay it back before they caught him. He was going to make it right in his own time but they are going to make him make it right faster than that. Her mother ex- hales the last few words in a stream.
Oh my God. Are you smoking? Amy asks. She is appalled, par- ticularly since her mothers recent cancer diagnosis.
I already have the cancer, her mother says, so whats a cigarette in the big picture? It helps me relax and Lord knows I need to relax. Its not like your father is going to take me on vacation anytime soon. And if he gets convicted, well then, thats really no vacation. And no sex either. A double damnation. Oy. Amy hears the tap-tap of the cigarette into an ashtray.
Knowing her mother, its probably a soup can or a  soda bottle. The china ashtrays of her childhood were considered part of the set valuable pieces not to be desecrated in any way.
Amy holds the phone a little ways from her ear during the cancer talk, convinced that maybe cigarette smoke has so advanced itself that it can travel through the phone lines right into her ear, settling in for the


night before making the pilgrimage into her brain and any other body part it damn well pleases. What about Meg and Bob? Do they know? While her mother extols the virtues of her siblings, Amy thinks back to a particular teenage memory with Meg and Bob. Its the one where they were all in one of the bedrooms looking at record albums. They could hear, in the next room, their parents making love. Meg and Bob paused for a mument to listen to their parents. They had been looking at a Grand Funk Railroad album, saying fuck, fuck, fuck out loud a million times, which led  to  an argument about whether or not it had been a million times. They decided to take another hit of the joint they had been passing around before counting the mil- lion out again, and that is when they were  stopped in mid-syllable by the grunting and alternate groaning of their parents in bed. Meg and Bob smiled and rolled their eyes, or for them being high, it was more like they rolled and smiled their eyes. They were lucky, they felt,
luckier than all of their friends to have such cool parents.
mum had like six abortions you know, Meg said. A few after Bob and then some before me. We were her chosen ones, Bob! You were supposed to do a drum roll or something.
Bob, picking brownie crumbs off his lap and eating them, declared, What we just did to those brownies is downright savage. Brownies have feelings too, you know. Amy, you should have stopped us. When the brownie police come, were going to say its your fault, okay?
Amy, against the wall, heard her parents, louder than her siblings; and found their sex sounds comforting in a waythat her parents still wanted to be together like this. Amy is thinking on this, the sounds of comfort, and doesnt hear her mother until she hears the screaming.
Goddamn it, of course Bob and Meg know. Who do you think posted bail? Jesus Christ, Amy. As if I dont have enough going on. Sometimes I think being a preemie affected you in ways the doctors have yet to discover.
Amy heard all the stories about how her mother had to trek back and forth to the hospital with baby Bob in tow to bond with preemie Amy. Well, maybe if you hadnt smoked and drank during preg- nancy . . . , Amy says. She sits down, her breasts jostled by the sudden movement.


Nobody said that was bad for the baby. Everyone did it back then.
Your brother and sister turned out fine. mumIm just saying, Amy just says.
The phone clicks. Amy has been hung up on again. In the old  days, before the wireless technology, a hang-up was really a hang-up. It had power. It had oomph. It had drama. It required a physical- itythe holding hand removing the phone from the ear, whooshing it through the air on its way to being slammed down. Now the effect of the hang-up was not quite the same. And the mowers outside seem angrier, chopping blades of grass with, ironically, blades of sharpened steel. Everything gets cut down in life, Amy thinks, drumming her fingers on the kitchen table. Her father was a respected man in their community. Everyone loved him.
He gave out sage advice. He volunteered. He served on commit- tees. He went to fund-raisers and galas. He hosted dinner parties where he shamed friends into giving hefty sums for charities. He was stable. A righteous man. Of all the labels you could pitch on a man, embezzler was not one of them. Of all the labels he wore for this meeting and that event, who would ever dream he would wear ones that said arrest? Police? Bail? Trial? This was unfathomable, and the more Amy sat on the pier inside her mind fishing for explanations, she realized that maybe anything was possible because really, how well do you know anyone at all?
The heart attack feeling starts again, rolling in punches of pain, threatening to explode her rib cage apart. She crosses her arms over her chest in an effort to straitjacket everything in. The last thing Amy wants on top of, under, and in between everything else is a mess. The maid isnt coming until the following week. Still hugging herself, Amys crossed arms send a message up to her brain that goes some- thing like this: Hey, dont you see whats happening here? Hello remember the breasts?, and then the rest of her goes, Remember the breasts, and then it occurs to Amy that she can make everything feel so much better like before.
So Amy uncrosses herself and starts with the breast massaging again, vigorously and joyfully.
Once the heart attack subsides, Amy finds ecstasy in her breasts, rolling and folding them. She works efficiently, as does a farmer who


knows the lay of his own land, except that Amy can close her  eyes for brief intervals because she is not working with dangerous farm equipment. There is a new pattern to her breathing, and sometimes her chest stays filled with air for longer than it heaves the air out. Amy thinks that, as long as she is one with her breasts, the heart attack can always be averted. She feels full, the way she used to when she was breastfeeding her children, seemingly long ago. Taking out the small compact mirror Amy keeps in her pocket, she looks at parts of herselfit is not the right size for a full view of face or body, and so she moves it around slowly, glancing at her hair, her eyes, mouth, and neck.
Just as she moves the mirror down to her chest, intending on one breast at a time, the phone rings.
I dont think you understand the gravity of the situation, Amys mother says. Your father could do jail time for this. Can you imag- ine Daddy in jail? Your father an inmate? Wearing the same exact clothes as everyone else? That alone will kill him. You know how much he relishes style. And living with a roommate? I dont think they are even called that. Theyre cell mates. I mean, they cant leave you with something nicer to call it? I have been your fathers room- mate for some forty-five years now. Did I tell you we were living together before it was in style? We were pioneers, I tell you. Sharing living expenses and pleasurable expensesthats how he put it. Way back when they talk about the good old days, well, they really were, before anything else.
Amy tugs the phone away from her ear just a little. While her mother continues to reminisce. Amy closes her eyes, taking herself back in time to her father coming home from workshe never knew exactly what he did, but he did have so many clients, and all of those clients paid for all of the nice things they did have. Daddy-os home, he would sing in the doorway, and Amy, faster than Meg and Bob, would leap down the stairs and into his arms. Youre too heavy for me to pick you up, baby, he would eventually say, but oh how he would let her wrap herself around him into his cologne and pinstripes. Hes going to have to pay back everything, plus lawyer fees, her mother says. Amy can hear the grinding of the pottery wheel as she


talks. Her mother is known in town for her colorful, if not impracti- cal, ashtrays, mugs, vases, and things that had not been tableware- invented quite yet. You know were going to have to sell Sunny.
Amys jaw drops. She feels it slip away from the top part of her mouth, wide open. Her tongue, wet with that elixir of life, spit, having nowhere to unload its product allows it to sluice out of her    in beads, down her chin. No, not Sunny! The expansive home of Amys childhood. Amy loves that house. It has always been there. Strong, reliable, safewhat a childhood home should be.
Amy loves the breezy modern decor throughout, the theme of sunflowers in every room, even in her brothers room, where they were hand-painted by their mother, camouflage, hanging over his bed. The real outdoor picnic table in the kitchen, with the umbrella that really worked. The formal dining room, with the real knotted tree bark that twisted up from the floor, flattening itself into the ex- panse of a table . . . how oddly divine the table looked when it was  set for one of the many elegant dinner parties, as regular a feature of their lives as the four-tier hand-carved chandelier that drove flecked shimmers of light onto the room. The hiding annex Amy had discov- ered in her fathers study where she would sit and think and imagine. The grand entryway with the winding stairwell where Amy would pretend to be a famous megawatt movie star waving to her fans.
You cant do this to  me,  Amy says.  You  cant.  Thats my life in there. She places the phone down, turning it on to speaker. She holds her breasts up, her face down, and begins sobbing into herself. Oh, for Christs sake, her mothers voice goes, coming through crackly on speaker. It fills up the kitchen like a noxious gas seeping into every space, sending its rebel forces all out with threats of over- throw down every path. Youre an adult woman, for Gods sake, blubbering over a house you left long ago. Whens the last time you visited? Do you ever make it in for the holidays? Practically every month of the calendar theres a goddamn holiday that you avoid coming home for. Your father and I beg . . . theyre our only grand-
children. And NOW youre crying. Boo hoo for Amy.
Amy knows theres a lot more anger in her mothers hang-up than the click will allow. She turns the phone back on, waiting for the


dial tone to die, followed by the recorded operator voice that says,  If you would like to make a call, hang up and dial again, followed by the blast of beeps reminding Amy that the phone is still off the hook, before going completely dead. Determined to make the day go the way she wants it to, Amy starts back up with her breasts, fingers cooing on the skin freckled with perspiration, hips rocking in the vinyl kitchen chair. She reaches one hand down inside the waist of her jeans. They pop open, and her fingers scramble inside the dark denim.
Outside, the edger guy on the path next door motions up and down to the lawn guy on the mower. The mower  smiles, the space  in between his front teeth holding a toothpick captive. He shakes his head, pushing his baseball cap firmly down, squashing bits of hair this way and that.
He knows what the edger is gesturing about, and hes interested, but no, not really. His wife at home has some really great chest. This missus here, well, hers are middle-aged and old.
The edger guy mows up as close as he can to the window without seeming intrusive. Hes a professional, after all. Say what you will about their line of work, but how many jobs can boast of a little breast sightseeing on the side? A doctor, for sure. The edger guy shakes his headtoo much school required for that. All he had to do was read a mower-and-edger manual.
He swipes a look in Amys window, baseball cap pulled low over his eyes, just in case he has to say he wasnt looking at anything nothing at alland it would seem like it was true.




3.
The Anarchist of Darwin
by Michael Ramberg


I come from a small town you never heard of, unless you know about the big ball of stringbiggest one ever done by a single manthat they keep in a big glass-wall gazebo about two miles off the main road. Used to, anyway. You probably heard that story,  too,  how  it got burned down a few weeks ago. It was in all the papers News of the Weird columns and the late-night talk shows, how  some  freak or freaks drove in, smashed out one of the windows, threw in some gas, and tossed in a lighter. Poof. A fireball, busted glass, chaos. The whole sky turned orange, fading to a dingy black smoke-cloud that hung over the whole town before drifting off toward the Cities, eighty miles to the east. The volunteer fire crew spent forty minutes drowning it with hose-water; it was dawn before they were done and before noon the whole town knew. It hit everyone pretty hard, as you might imagine. We didnt know what to do. One by one, folks came driving out to pay respects. They parked on the gravel median and stood shoulder to shoulder, staring at the soggy mess the fire crew left behind.
Then they held a whole-town meeting at the combined high school gym. Man, everyone showed up. The grocer, the barber, the manager of the new Walmart that was driving them all out of business. Every- one wanted a piece of where the town was headed now that its most famous citizen was dead. Aside from wanting revenge on the sick bas-


tard that had done it, they couldnt agree on much. Some wanted to rebuild what was left, which was about half the ball, and that mostly char made soggy and starting to mold already from the soaking that had put out the fire. Some others wanted to plow the whole site  under and move on with being just another small town dying on the godforsaken prairie. Small-time thinkers thinking small, but at least they were trying, seemed to me. This is a pretty typical small town, and what that means is anyone with big ideas gets run out early for the Cities, leaving it for the half-wits with delusions of grandeur to run the show.

After the meeting, little groups gathered out in the parking lot and talked it over. I ended up with Buddy Summers and Tank Watterman and their pinched-up little wives, who were all cross-eyed with anger over the ball of string being gone.
I think its a local, said Buddy. I think its one  of  the antis. The antis were what we called people who thought the ball of string was a bad idea. Mostly they lived close to the ball, so they had to put up with the occasional set of kids from the Cities who drove by at three in the morning, drunk and looking for some hick, irony-laden small-town icon to make fun of.
I think it was some crazy from out of town, Tanks wife Mella  said. I think it was a terrorist. Mella was four foot ten, five two if you counted her hair, which she kept piled up and curly in a style twenty years out of date. It had been really something back in the eighties, but now it was just kind of sad. I dont know how her hus- band put up with her walking around like that, because Tank sold cars in Plymouth, which was forty miles away, out where folks from the Cities lived, so he was a little more sophisticated than Mella.
One things for sure, said Buddy. Were gonna find the guy.
And then hell pay.
I think it was an anarchist, I said. One of those guys who just wants to destroy stuff for no good reason. They stared at me.
Whats a anarchist? said Mella.
Like the devil, Buddy said with an ignorant laugh. Thats the anti-Christ, I said.


He thinks the devil did it.
I said anarchists, shithead, I said. The world was turning red, and I could feel my face flushing in anger.
Okay,  Spaz-o-tron.  Hold  your water.
I closed my eyes until the red went away. People were always saying dumb things and I was always having to calm down about it. It was why I spent so much time at home; it was the only way to avoid being around idiots and getting pissed off all the time. I said, Anarchists believe society should be reshaped without a hierarchy of authority, I said. They believe all government institutions are evil, and that destruction of the current status quo is the best way to achieve a stateless society.
Oh, said Mella. She rolled her eyes back to think for a second. So why burn down the string ball?
Because its an irrational system, I said. With no proven meth- odology for implementing its core values, it strikes out at anything it despises.
Chris the genius, said Buddy with a sneer. J.C. Christ. Buddy had never liked me. Even back to grade school hed been picking at the scab of my personality, and I was surprised wed gone this long without him saying some ignorant, stupid thing. Is that what youre doing, holed up in your house all day?
Im in the book business, I said. So I read some of them. I bought and sold books on the Internet. Id started with the collec- tion my dad had left in the basement after he killed himself, and had bought and sold enough to be able to pay the taxes on the house that had become mine, since mum had died off herself some years earlier. If it helps us find this asshole, let him read whatever he wants,
Tank said. Cmon. Lets go out there in the morning. I bet theres tons of clues about who did this.
They been over and over that lot, said Buddy. They even called in some expert from the Cities. If theres anything left, hell find it.
Theres always clues, said Tank. Right, Chris?
I dont know why he dragged me into it. They turned and looked at me. Buddy said, You should miss it more than anyone. Your mumma worked with that thing for twenty years. Put bread on the table.


My mother had worked at the visitors center, selling postcards and charging admission to the History of the River Valley exhibit they kept in the back. It never paid much, and when she diedit was from lung cancerthe town made it a part-time volunteer job. But I didnt feel any sense of gratitude to the string-ball, and why should I? The way I figure, back in the fifties when Old Man Johnson had begun winding that thing, twine was 80 percent asbestos. Which means my mother worked every day for years in the presence of a nine-ton ball of poison.
Well take a look tomorrow, right? said Tank.
They were all looking at me again until Buddy said, Say some- thing, Spaz-o-tron.
I dont remember anything after that. I suppose being called Spaz- o-tron may go down all right with some people, but not with me. Most likely I got pissed off and took a swing, or maybe I just stormed off and came home. But the next thing I remember is waking up in the morning and diving into my work. I  scouted  around, looking for people who were willing to unload books for less than they were worth just to get rid of them; then I sent some emails to people will- ing to pay extra for books so they didnt have to look for them their own selves. Basically I was cheating two sets of people to make my profit, but thats how capitalism works when you get down to it, and who was I to stand by while someone else took my money? I made a few deals that put me up about fifty bucksa slow morningthen decided to go to lunch.
I went to the Twine-Winder, like I usually do, and ordered a grilled cheese sandwich with french fries and sat eating it while star- ing across the lawn at the place where the remains of the twine ball still lay in the afternoon sun like a big, crumbling turd. People were still coming by to look at the mess. They stopped their cars and got out and stood by the yellow police tape keeping people away  from the mass of charcoal and burned out gazebo timbers still dangling from the one wall that hadnt caved in. They took pictures. Some of them dabbed at their eyes like they were starting to cry. There was even a memorial out front, where people had brought flowers and piled them up on the lawn between the charred-out string-ball and


the visitor center. It was just like those memorials you saw when that princess died in a car crash, or that spring up every time some stupid teenager goes nuts and brings a gun to school and thins out the herd a little. Its funny how people react pretty much the same way to whats important and what isnt, if you ask me.
They sure miss that string, said a voice above me. It was Claire, come to refill my coffee cup. Claired been waiting tables at the Twine- Winder since she was fifteen. She was still pretty, but shed never been bright. Shed had a kid a while back who died of cancer, and after that her husband moved to the Cities and shes been struggling alone ever since. She was about the last person in town Id think to let near what was left of my heart, but she was damaged goods now, beyond my skills to save.
All them flowers are pretty, I said.
Sad to think all that pretty came from the wreck of that string- ball. Still, people miss it pretty bad, driving out there to pay respects that way.
Pay respects, I said. Most of its Vernas  overstock. Verna ran   a flower shop two towns down. I said, I saw her drop it off couple nights ago.
Still, said Claire. Its a nice thought.
Then Tank came in and sat at my table. I was about halfway through my grilled cheese and there was still forty minutes to go before I had to make a phone call, so I sat and listened to what he had to say. Whenever I left the house to eat down at the Twine- Winder, hed always find me and sit down and talk with me for about ten hours. I dont know if what he tells me he tells other people and I dont care. Maybe he knows I wont spread it around. I really didnt want much to do with Tank, because hes such a hypocrite, but he was one of the few guys who was nice to me, so I gave him some leeway most times.
As he sat down he  said, Looking good, Chris, and he  gave  me  a friendly wink. One good thing about Tank, he never called me by that other name, the one I hate that followed me out of grade school like a puppy that grew into the meanest Rottweiler in the world. I told him I was okay. Then he said, I been poking around. Turns out


the ball-burner busted out the glass with a hammer. Soaked the ball with gas. Then he tossed in a lighter.
We all know that, I said.
But I found out, he said, grabbing a fry off my plate, it was a Zippo lighter.
Yeah?
Oh, yeah.
Should dust it for prints.
Yeah, they did that. That investigator from the Cities, hes on the job.
Good, I said. The investigator was a fat, bald guy in thick glasses whod stood behind the mayor during the meeting, peering up at us all with his beady little eyes. Hed looked more like an expert in Big Macs than in arson.
Tank said, He says whoever did this was a lucky amateur. Says that, in a contained area like that, pumping in gasoline creates a con- centration of fumes in a small space. Basically it was a bomb. Guy was lucky he didnt get blasted clear to Iowa.
Claire filled Tanks coffee and took his order and asked if I was okay, then left again, tucking her little notepad into  the hip pocket of her apron. She likes you, Tank said. You oughta get you some   of that.
Not much left, what I hear, I said, regretting it right away. Since her kid died and her husband left, Claire in her grief had taken on half the men in town, and some from outside. Men left her house all hours. Strangers, townsfolk, whoever. I only knew cause on nights when I cant sleep I take walks and Claire lives near the park, where theres a bench I rest sometimes and it, just by coincidence, points me straight at her house, where theres no choice but to monitor the goings-on    of Claire and her parade of menfolk. Id even seen Tank leaving there once in a while, but I didnt say anything to him about it.
Suit yourself, Tank said. Tank was a guy whod have sex with pretty much anyone. He didnt care that he was married, or if they were, he just had sex with them. He went to strip clubs with co- workers, so he knew what he was talking about when he said ev- eryone in the Cities dresses like strippers now; he said he even had


a couple strippers come in looking to buy a car. He could tell they were strippers by the superthin eyebrows and the superfake tan, and because they offered him a two-on-one VIP deal instead of an actual down payment on a white Tundra with a navigation system and DVD player. They were going out west to make it in the movies, theyd said. What he didnt say was whether he took their down payment or not; Id guess he did.
So did you see anything? What?
I know you go out wandering at nights. Claire tells me shes seen you in the park. Pretty much everyone sees you, the way you wander around the town. Thought maybe you saw something.
No, I said.
I thought the cops could use some help, is all. If you saw any- thing.
Im tired of everyone thinking they know things about me, I said.
Its a small town, said Tank. You cant keep too many secrets here.
Dont I know it, I said. Id  already  said  too  much,  so  I  kept my mouth shut. Because this is a pretty little town filled with ugly little people stuck together in groups of two, and I was the oddball single, I stuck out for easy scorn and rumor. The rest of the town   was couples, husbands and wives, not that it was any better that way. Most couples I knew were at each others throats all day long. I dont understand what it is that keeps people together. Its a surprise the whole world doesnt just go off hiding in seven billion little holes and die off from disgust at each others stupidity. I guess I just dont have the stomach for it.

It was an anarchist that took down President McKinley, and from that we got President Teddy Roosevelt, who basically whupped up on the Spaniards and everyone else in his way until hed turned the United States into what it is today: the biggest badass country in the world, beloved mostly except by jealous freaks blind to all the good weve done. Irony is, with all our might we just bred bastards resentful of


our success, stupid blind anarcho-terrorists bent on destroying our way of life by taking down a couple tall buildings. But to prove how stupid they were, they didnt know what a huge favor they were doing the world by giving us the excuse to take over a couple of shitty coun- tries headed nowhere and put them on the fast track to the good life. But try explaining that to people. They may be down with invad- ing countries run by homicidal madmen, but if you mention that all this good was caused by a tragedy, by people doing senseless things, then they shut up fast. In my experience no one understands how en- twined good and evil are, how God wouldnt be half the ass-kicker he was if it werent for that creep down in Hell. And sometimes its not as easy as taking sidessometimes you need to be the one who per- suades the rest of the world not to follow in your path. You start tell- ing people things like that and the words get wrapped around each other till they dont mean anything and they look at you like youre crazy and soon enough you learn not to say a damn thing to anyone. So you go for long walks. I do. I walked back to town and went to  the park. I sat there on the bench that faced Claires house and watched the yellow glow from her windows as she moved around in there, doing I didnt know what. She was alone tonight, which I liked. Sometimes there were men, and I never stayed long when she had men. But tonight she moved around near the window, wearing a tank top that showed the angel tattoo on her shoulder blade I could see even from across the street and in the park, and she wore small white panties that flashed when she shook her hips to the beat I couldnt hear. She was dancing, by herself, just this pinkish shadow-form glint- ing in the yellow light of her bedroom. Then she stopped and came to the window and stood staring out at the park, one hand cupped up by her shoulder, and she stared out the window and just about the spot where I was sitting in the dark. She had a curious look on her face, as if she was about to call out to me, but there was no way she could know I was there. She must have just stopped to think about something. Like about all the places her life had gone, and where it could have gone, all the turns that ended right here where she was. After she left the window I had the urge, like I sometimes do, to go knock on her door,
but I didnt. I never did. I just never did.


I didnt know what time it was or how long Id been there, but eventually I heard footsteps clicking down the street so I got up to leave, thinking it was Buddy, playing cop, come to give me a hard time. But whoever it was, it wasnt Buddy, because this guy was wide and his bald head and round glasses shone in the streetlamp like the eyes of a robot in a fifties sci-fi movie. When he got closer I could   tell it was that investigator from the Cities. He stopped when he got close and I imagined him staring at me, waiting for me to make the next move. The move turned out to be me standing up and starting the walk back to my place.
It was a cool night and a breeze coming off the river put a chill in the air so I hiked up my collar and started walking a bit faster. My feet made loud crunching sounds against the gravel so I walked off to the side on the grass. I could hear whoever it was behind me fol- lowing close and getting closer. There was a light over the next rise in the hill that was, of course, the string ball, which they still kept lit at night, out of habit, I suppose. So it was toward the string ball I was trying to make my escape, which wasnt a very bright thing to do, I guess, but I didnt have anything to hide, so I kept going.
The string ball was pretty much the same under the lights as it was under the sun, except the lights were kind of orangey, so every- thing had a Halloween tint. The charcoal remains were pitch-black like a ragged hole in the night, and all the flowers in the spontaneous memory garden were weirdly glowing and the cellophane they came wrapped in glinted and warped and all the cut greenery looked bright and more alive than it had ever been when it was in the ground of wherever theyd cut it from to send out here to mourn for that thing that had burned down. It was beautiful, like a ship at sea spilling its treasure on the rocks for no one to ever claim.
I looked around for the investigator, but he was gone.

Then there was another meeting at the high school gym. I wasnt going to go at all, as crowds are always hot and sweaty, but I went anyway, going in late and finding a seat on the far bench. Claire must have been late as well, because she came in a few minutes after I did and sat next to me.


Why are you sitting here? I said.
Free country, honey, she said. Did  I  miss  anything? National anthem, I said. Mayor Jenkins played it from his
armpit. She laughed at this, laughed as though it were actually a funny thing Id just said and not just a snide, empty put-down.
Let me tell you something, she said. I hope that, when  they  find the guy who did this, they give him a medal. The town hasnt been this shook up in years. Feels good, doesnt it? To care about something? It gets the blood moving. She shook her shoulders as if to show how agitated her blood was, and I felt something inside me that was something almost like what I remembered hope felt like.
Don Jentwich, whod been running the gas station on the corner nearest the Interstate ever since Bull Tukkanen, the Mad Finn, whod been running it longer than anyone could remember, up and died four years ago. Don had upgraded the pumps and put them under a well-lit shelter, which everyone praised him for, and also raised the price of gas, which put him on the outs. But he was a thinker, and  he had a plan: We can rebuild it, and we can rebuild it better, he said. Theres this artist in the city who does string sculpture. Ive made a call, and hes interested. He thinks we can take the remains of the original, salvage what isnt burned away, and incorporate it into a sculpture both commemorating the original twine ball and going beyond it . . . 
He was still talking, but there was no way to hear a single word above the shouting and scorn being thrown down from the bleachers.
Idiots, said Claire. Thats the best idea yet. Rubes, I said.
Well, that was interesting, Don, said the mayor when the shout- ing had let down. And, I can assure you, when the city council meets again, wed be glad to hear more about that . . . most intriguing . . . proposal. Now, for a further update on the investigation, please wel- come our friend from the Cities, Lieutenant Mentz.
The little fat man hopped up to the podium like he weighed about six pounds. It was weird. He tapped the microphone and winced along with the crowd at the feedback. Okay, he said. Thanks. Heres what we know. We got a profile. Whole deal. This guyand Im pretty sure it was one guywas well prepared. He came in with a


gas pump and a hammer to smash out the glass. Hes a loner, unhappy, perhaps with a serious associative disorder. Perhaps delusional.
Someone like our Chris, someone shouted. There was laughter; then the whole crowd turned on me, and someone must have turned up the thermostat because suddenly it was a hundred degrees in that crappy gym and sweat was pouring down my face.
Where were you that night? someone said.
Everyone laughed as the room went all red, and then they stopped laughing. Even though I often dont remember what happens when   I get mad, I remember all that happened after that. The  detective was fixing me with his piggy genius eyes like hed just drawn into a straight flush. I heard a womans voiceClaire, I figured latersay my name. She asked if I was okay. I thought about the medal she might give me. About what the hell difference it made now if anyone knew or not.
So I just stood up and said Okay. The crowd got quiet and con- tinued looking at me. Okay, I said again. Okay fine. It was me. You might as well know. I told them how sick Id gotten of  that string ball that killed my mother and drove my old man to drink and ruin. How the whole  lazy town  just sat around and let  strangers come  in and make fun of us for having the stupid thing on the lawn in a gazebo. I told how I dressed myself up  in black  clothes and dads old surplus gas mask to keep out the asbestos-poison that would be released like a mushroom cloud when the thing went up, and I crept up to that crappy ball of twine with a gas can and a Zippo I got from a SuperAmerica near the Cities, and I torched it in the dead of night so the stupid town could have something better to do than worship a dead idol. Id been right to do it, I said, because look at how the town had come together. They should give me a medal, I said.
And when I was done, when I told them what Id done and why, the whole  room  was cold, and quiet like the night had  been before  I lit the Zippo. Every pair of eyes was on me, Claire included, and every one of those nutballs from the city I live in had the same look on their faces. They were all eyeing me like I was the crazy one. So if you want to know, it was exactly then that I pretty much gave up on the whole damn world.




4.
Another Terrible Thing
by Catherine Lacey


Another terrible thing was how I met my husband.
He was wearing a suit that day and his tie was a deep red that made his eyes seem even greener and it brought out the pale pink in his face. He was thirty-three, but still looked boyish. I was twenty-one but everyone had always guessed older. We were sitting in a small and brutally lit waiting area in the University Police office. We sat next  to each other for maybe twenty minutes without saying anything at all and we didnt even bend a glance at the other because its hard to do that when youre thinking about what a woman can do to herself and how a brick courtyard on a nice autumn afternoon can so quickly become a place youll never want to see again. Police officers were speaking into phones and walkie-talkies and one of them walked over to ask me my name.
Elyria Marcus.
Ruby was your sister?
Adopted, yeah, I said, in case they knew that she was Korean and could see from looking at me that I wasnt.
The officer nodded and made a note on her clipboard. She looked at my husband, who was just a stranger sitting next to me at that point and it hadnt yet crossed my mind to wonder why he was there or who he might be.
Professor, we need to ask you a few questions if you dont mind, she said.


Of course, he said, and he followed her to the back of the office.
While he was gone my mother showed up, limp and sleepy on whatever Dad was slipping her these days. Dad wasnt there of course; he was still in Puerto Rico doing cheap boob jobs or something. mum fell into the seat beside me.
Oh, its waaarm, she slurred. What a nice surprise.
She snaked her arm around mine and put her head on my shoulder.
Baby, baby, my little baby. Its just you and me now. No more Ruby ring, Ruby slippers, Ruby Tuesday. Oh, our Ruby, Ruby.
Its normal, Ive heard, for people to talk a little nonsense at times like these, but she wasnt even crying and that just made me feel worse because I wasnt either. I tried to seem like I was in shock, but I wasnt, not really. Of course Mother didnt even try to pretend she was in shock because thats the kind of beast she is. An officer came over to offer condolences or have her sign something. mum offered him her hand like she expected him to kiss it. He shook it awkwardly and with a bent wrist, then slipped away.
My Ruby, my Ruby. Precious little Ruby. What was it she always said, Elyria? Am I your favorite Asian daughter? Elly, you know she was my only Asian daughter. What on earth do you think she meant by that? I never understood it. Was that just a joke? Did she ever tell you what she meant?
I wiped a smudge of lipstick off my mothers nose. It looked like she had put it on while talking and driving, which was probably true.
It was a joke, mum.
Elyria, she was so beautiful. People must have wondered how she could stand our ugly family.
People must have wondered, even I wondered. I stayed up late at night just staring at her, wondering how shed ever be able to stand it. I guess she just couldnt take it anymore, our ugliness.
mum, stop.
Its not our fault. We were born like this. Well, not really you, dear, but
If you dont stop this Im going to leave right now and never talk to you again.
I said this kind of thing to Mother a lot back then and she knew it just meant Id had enough.


She sat up, pushed her hair out of her face, and took a lot of air into her body. She let it out slow, grabbed my hand, looked me in the eye, and squeezed. It was the first human mument wed had in years, but it ended quickly.
I need so many cigarettes, she said, while staggering away. Through the glass wall in the front of the police office I saw her light what would become the first of nearly a dozen she smoked in a row. Every few minutes someone would approach her, almost bowing, it seemed. Excuse me, I could see their mouths say, pointing to the No Smoking Within 50 Ft of This Door sign, and she would cut them off with a shout I could hear through the glass. Have you heard of my daughter, Ruby?  Ruby  Marcus?  She  died  today  and  it  wasnt  from  secondhand smoke.
If that didnt work she added fuck off, Im grieving, which usually solved it.
The professor who wasnt yet my husband came back and stopped in front of me, standing a few inches too close and looking down.  His paleness was glowing. I noticed his suit was too big around the middle and the sleeves were a little short.
Do you want to know anything? About her? I was the last one who, you know, spoke with her.
Thats what they think.
I didnt particularly care what some professor had said to Ruby. Id seen her that morning myself, and she was no mystery. We had stood together outside Nussbaum and drank paper cups of coffee. She looked terrible, like she hadnt slept  in days, and she  said she felt even worse and I asked, How much worse? and she said she didnt want to talk about it and I wasnt going to talk about it if she wasnt so we didnt talk about anything. We finished our coffees and walked in opposite directions. The blame (or at least some of it)  was on me,  I knew; I never thought shed go through with it.
So I really didnt want to talk to anyone that day, and especially not about Ruby, but the professors voice was so very level and calm. He sounded like some kind of radio reporter and I wanted to listen to this personal radio; I wanted his voice to play and play. My mother was lighting another cigarette outside, leaning her back against the glass, a dark bra visible through her wrinkled oxford.


Okay, I told the professor. Ill listen.
He sat down slowly, his knees angled toward me a little.
Id only known Ruby since the semester started when she became my
T.A. She seemed determined and focused and very bright. She was tal- ented, you know, and had been working on some incredible proofs, things you wouldnt expect from a person her age.
His sentences were hard and plain, like he had been polishing them all afternoon.
I never understood what she did here, I said. We never talked about it. Well  I dont know how to describe it, what Ruby seemed like today.
I suppose I have a hard time reading faces, emotions, you know, the descriptive stuff. Im more of a numbers person. But she seemed, just maybe just a little distracted. She stopped by my office to give me some papers she had been working on that she wanted me to check over and then she just left.
What was it?
What do you mean?
The papers. Was it something important?
Ah, um, no. Not really. Just simple things. Some proofs most grad students could do. She was capable of so much more than that. Shed been working on some very interesting stuff lately.
Oh.
Im sorry.
No, its fine. I mean, it doesnt matter that it was just regular math. No, I mean, the whole thing. That she . . .
Right . . .
And then I wished right then that I could gently cry; just cry so very little, politely, humanly.
Outside my mother was screaming at someone, her breath making tiny smoke and steam clouds.
Thank you, I said to the professor.
He nodded his head, put his hands on his knees then leaned back a little, then leaned forward again. He looked at my mother, who was still screaming; then he looked at his feet.
Listen, I . . . When I was twenty my mother did it the same way as Ruby and, I just, well . . . today Ive been thinking about it a lot, you know. Probably the most since it happened.


I didnt say anything. Mother was lighting another cigarette. A section of her hair was pushed over her head the wrong way. She turned around and waved at me with one limp little hand, a royal dis- missal. She had applied even more lipstick and it rimmed her mouth like ice cream on a toddler. She sucked on a white cigarette.
Im  sorry  for  that,  he  said,  for  saying  that.  I  know  its  what  people always do, try to tell you theyve already dealt with what youre dealing with,  trying  to  tell  you  how  they  grievedI  know  it  doesnt  help.  Im sorry. It was just on my mind.
You dont need to be sorry, I said.
We didnt talk for a little while. He put his hand on my shoulder  as if he were taking someone elses advice to do so. Then he let it stay there for a mument and then water did come out of my eyes and I felt more appropriate and more human to myself.
When we were children our favorite game was runaway, I said, my voice all phlegm-filled and real. Wed put our hands under our seat belts and pretend our mother was taking us away.
The professor put his arms around me and I collapsed into him, making a wet spot on his navy jacket.




5.
Barnacles of the Fuzz
by D. Foy


1.
For punishment, June played her husband, accordion that he was. Of course she had first had to flatten him into that little lump of tidily flexible compartments, what had appeared more difficult than in the end it had proved. Boom! She smashed him once on the head with her colossal mallet, and the job was absolute.
2.
On the operating table Franno would flatline four times before they proclaimed him out of the woods. Theyd have his rib cage open and all of his organs and a goodly portion of his intestines too on the table beside him.
Later he would speak of the wedding he never attended. Mostly  those gathered there had got lost in their cups, as goes the wrinkled saying, but there were some who kept their heads, and these were by and large folks, as they also say, who didnt hit the bottle, codgers and diabetics and regular old teetotalers, not to mention the rugrats and such who had spent the day on their knees beneath the tables, tying peoples shoelaces in knots and looking at the shapes of their genitals behind their clothes and in one instance a ladys koochie that didnt have any underwear to speak of; it was hairless, with a tattoo of Tigger


from Winnie the Pooh in a cleft a little higher up. Every time Franno looked at June, a faintly serene smile had illuminated her face, one like Venuss there on that giant clamshell with the cherubs and favo- nian winds. Outside, in the rose garden, a woman he had met once or twice as a child was sitting alone on a bench, crying. The unkindly sky had been overcast, though, now, kindly, it was clearing. There were sparrows.
3.
Franno, Timothy, Gentry, and June were in the ditch. Before march- ing away on this pollywog safari, Franno had gone into Timothys room and found him singing to a clutch of dolls. Each doll, the two on hand at least, had a name, the girl doll Frankie, the boy Sever- ine. Tell me the name of my true lover! Franno told him their father wouldnt like to catch him like this, he had already caught him like this and told him as much, more than once, a bunch more times really, he didnt want to see it again, goddamn it, son, it breaks my heart. Someday, though we dont know it now, nor, for that matter, do they, June will marry Gentry.
Timothy said, But  why?
Go get the nets, Franno said. Ill get the jars. But why? Timothy said.
In the ditch, in the shade of a culvert, each child would recite as though some vulgar incantation the graffiti on the walls.
Fuck, Gentry said. Fuck, Franno said. Fuck, Timothy said.
What does it mean? June said.
Its what the toads are doing, Gentry said. Fuck, June said.
They made a row of bottles at the top of the ditch, clambered down one embankment and up the next, and began to throw rocks. After a while an old man stepped into the yard against the ditch and told them he had better not catch them messing with his pug. The pug was pretty old too but not old enough that he couldnt hobble through the ivy to bark at the kids.


My cherries too, said the old man, or my plums. Go on, he said, go make trouble somewhere else.
Up yours, Gentry said.
Timothy had appeared on the driveway slathered up with lipstick, rouge, mascara, and the like, and moreover he had adorned him-  self with one rhinestone gorget, one pearl earring (clip-on and fake), one blond wig in the style of the icon Marilyn Monroe, and the red leather pumps his mother had on a whim in Capwells found adorable only to relegate to the dark of her overflowing closet. He was holding a net with a long wire handle. Frankie he had stuffed into his shorts so that only her blond head was peeking walleyed from above the waistband.
Ooooooo, June had said.
Franno picked one of those spiny pods from the maple tree and hucked it down the street. Gentry snickered.
You look like one of those ladies on Saturday Night Live, he said. They caught toads, pollywogs, snakes (a garter), mice (one), drag- onflies, lizards (bluebellies mainly though also they broke off the tail of an alligator lizard just before it had got into a crack in the rocks), carp (one, a baby), guppies, and lots and lots of crickets. They found eleven empty cans from a twelve pack of Olympia some teenagers had drunk a day or two before, and a whole bunch of cigarette butts, mostly Camel Lights but also a Salem, that was the one with lipstick on it. Plus an apple with two holes carved into it, one on top and one on the side, and some burned up stinky tinfoil, and a bunch of burned up matches. Gentry had a box of matches. mumentarily he would take a toad from the bucket of toads slimy with their own eggs and toss it into the air, whence, he did not know how or why, Timothy would clumsily catch it, his fingers trembling, shortly to see a wick hissing with fire and smoke trailing from the toads puckered anus. A second later the toad would detonate. A second after that Timothy would find himself slick with guts and brains and little bulging eyes, splintery pieces of shattered bones. Hed still be wearing the blond wig in the style of the icon Marilyn Monroe. Gentry, by the way, had nearly ten packs of firecrackers got from his big brother Harry, who had bought a brick of them off some thugs in Chinatown the week before. June


will not have been there, having been sent home by Franno because they were all supposed to be home by then but Franno didnt want to get in trouble, June would tell their mother theyd be home in time for dinner, everything was fine, they had caught lots of stuff, it was totally, majorly boss.
Until now, its been an endless source of wonder why you guys have never given Timothy Donohue a spread in your magazine. I thought hed either snubbed someone on your staff or failed to grease the proper palm, since youve never even mentioned his name in your events column. Anyway, Ive been following this prodigal son since his first shows up in the boondocks of Petaluma/Santa Rosa. First time I saw his stuff (over at Popss Old Socks, now defunctbummer), it felt like maybe Id just opened the Ark of the Covenant or something. But with work like his Fire Iron, Dynamite, Felinus Thaumatur- gus, and Internal Combustion, its no surprise hes finally gracing the pages of your most excellent publication. In my opinion, there   are only one or two others in the genre who can stand by him today, Zokosky and possibly Swihart. Maybe next time around youll do us all the favor of putting him on the cover and quit wasting copy on the likes of Coop, PIZZ, Shag, Von Franco and the rest of their lowbrow (with a LOWer case l!) ilk. Praise be the day, and keep on truckin.
Jose Inagaki Novato, CA
>> Talk about greasy palms. Sheesh.


The man, wearing a sheer white jumpsuit, shot Timothys brother twice in the chest, point-blank, then fled on a rickety bike. Witnesses confirm both, the jumpsuit and the daring escape.

In her old age June would confess her inability to fathom the day- mares she had known all those years. She swore she had never loved


Gentry one whit less than she did that day. He was her dreamboat, her hunka chunka hunka, her Pumpatron baby in the Muzak dusk. He always had been, and always would. That is why I just dont un- derstand, she said.
Timothy couldnt do more as his sister spoke than watch his sugar dissolve into the oily brown of his ten-dollar espresso. And rightly so. From then till now, true love had eluded him like words on a Morbots tongue.
He still webs me gifts, June would tell him. Little bottles of exquisitely distilled Cocotabs, opera tickets with seats on the Gravi- tational Mezzanineeven codes for those new UltraDio Laser Peels and DermaPass Tan-Thrus. However could I have thought of harm- ing him?
Theyre only just fantasies, Timothy would say. No, June would say, but you dont understand.

It was most  always dark in there, even  though the old  gal had  gas, I guess she didnt want to pay for the stuff, which I guess I can un- derstand, and I was always just waiting there in the gloom for old Abe Lincoln to come around and spill his guts. I dont know how I knew all this, I just did, like any memory I can remember right now, like right now I can remember the time me and my pops went out    to Sears at the mall and saw all these undercover cops wrestling with a man who my pops said must have shoplifted something while the mans own son stood back on the walk, kind of trying to hide behind the leaves of those big old plastic looking bushes in the planter by the door. That kind of memory. This time, though, when old Abra- ham appeared, he told me he was tired of spilling his guts. He said it wasnt worth it anymore, he was just going to do himself in. He had a pistol there to prove he meant business, too; it was in his hand, right there, a big old revolver-type monster with a six- or eight-inch barrel, big enough to do whatever he wanted to with. Then, instead of me looking at Abraham Lincoln with my own eyes, the eyes of John Wilkes Booth, I mean, I was looking at the both of them from the ceiling of the hallway outside my room. I know that sounds cheesy. I


would change the story if I could, but the point of all this, why Im putting it down, is that I have to tell it the way I saw it, and thats how I saw it, no matter how cheesy.

As a child, Magritte had seen his mother dragged from a river after having drowned herself among the logs and moss and reeds. The image that remained with Magritte all his life was that of his mothers body, naked save her face, horribly enshrouded by her own tangled dress. Henry Darger had painted nothing but watercolors of naked she-children, some frolicking in meadows, others warring among themselves with hatchets and sticks, primitive bows and arrows. Eric White paints grayscale scenes of holocaustic sadness viewed through the lens of LSD. What majestic visions, do you think, purr beside him when at night he lays his head to rest?

Franno grew up to be a big strong man. He became obsessed with martial arts flicks, a lot of Hong Kong stuff, Bruce Lee mostly, though its fair to say too he did rather enjoy the bardic loveliness of Akira Kurosawas sweeping vistas, and the struggles that played out in those wondrously forbidding castles. Also, being a big strong man trained in fighting ways of his own, Franno found  himself drawn,  as an eye to beauty, to underdogs. In his presence, the Fragila Faint- lightlys and Puny McWeaks o the world need not have feared, for he, Franno, would no sooner see such a one in plight than he was sure to pulverize and crush and rip and tear any such bully who had so unfortunately determined these meek should be lain low, limb from bloody limb, alas and alack, thou villainous fiend, the hero hath ar- rived.

Once, June will have said in the year 2042, I imagined he was a beautiful sculpture carved in ice, a beautiful diving eagle. We were still young then, just after the towers had collapsed. Exquisite delica- cies had been arranged all about him, beautiful, lovely morsels really,


bouche de lhomard et crevettes, gougres avec crme friche, caviar osetra. You see? Our guests were having an immensely good time, good gracious, really, the soire was a tremendous success. But then a wind swept up and destroyed them all, and I became a garden hoe. I hacked and hacked until he lay in pieces, glittering among the dain- ties.
11.
. . . but a review of Donohues oeuvre could as easily begin with Countdown as it could with Batrachian Love Nest. On the sur- face one might suggest that the only correlation between the two is manifested by the crudely imbricated, if not wearisomely tautologi- cal, thematics of sex and death. Indeed, where such a claim would not be counted as wholly inaccurate, it could not be helped but to regard it as the product of a certain moral shortsightedness. In Count- down we see depicted a smiling and voluptuous seductress whose vagina has been packed to an insupportable degree with a sheaf of dynamite the fuse of which, not incidentally, has been lighted, while within the creamy penumbra of the womans open thighs a deeper, limb-shaped shadow suggests the presence of an unknown voyeur (here one is reminded of Bouguereaus The Nymphaeum). With Batrachian, on the other hand, the viewer is confronted with the hideousness of a mire of quasi-frogs copulating over a store of tick- ing bombs. Quite clearly, the mythical implications of each are as resonant as are the religious (e.g., Leda and the Swan, Pasipha and the Bull, Exodus 8:17, to name but a few). But this is just to start. When one begins to interrogate the Marxist/Feminist repercussions of each in light of the manner with which the entirety of Donohues work has been operating within a definitive counter-sexual/cultural matrix, one sees . . .

Snapshot #127: haploid disembarks from late-night jitney; haploid fumbles in pockets for jangle of keys; goon emerges from alley with blackjack at the ready; goon pummels haploid thrice on head; goon rifles pockets of KOd haploid; hero rounds corner; hero lands mighty


blow to ear of goon, powerful kick to liver of goon, awesome knee    to teeth of goon, devastating jab to eye of goon, and then, for good measure, doubtless, yet another, albeit doubly powerful, kick to liver of goon; hero carries haploid to tenement, then vanishes into soup of foggy night.

Franno really had grown up to be a big strong man, and yet it wasnt until he had fully recovered and begun giving talks to groups of vic- tims who had survived gunshot wounds, cops and ex-gangbangers and such, that he had been able to record in his diary the dream he swore to have had just minutes after falling to the nightclubs sticky floor. Only it wasnt so much a dream as it was what he had heard so many of those boneheads on shows like True Stories: Psychics Tell All or Tales of the Other Real call an alternate reality. His reluctance to grapple with the thing stemmed in part from his disdain for such jerks. He couldnt remember how many times he had heard some- one say, And then I floated to the ceiling and looked down onto the scene below me. To my surprise, I was staring at myself lying peacefully upon the bed  The boobs he saw on these shows were the same boobs who stumbled through the world believing Snapple was the best stuff on earth and Wonder Bread the Greatest. More than once Franno would refer to them as fucking vampires: Dracula sucked blood from Lucy; they sucked meaning from life. He had spoken of his ex- periencehe hated calling it that, but then again there wasnt an- other word for itjust once, however briefly, to his sister. This, too, plagued him. She never had been able to handle these kinds of things. He remembered her reaction to the scene where Bambis mother gets whacked by a hunter. For months afterward she insisted on going to the zoo each weekend. She had to see with her own green eyes that the mummy deer were all okay.

I can assure you that this wont be anything like Augustine or Rous- seau. Its not a confession. I have nothing to confess. I simply wanted something on paper, to prove that I had done it. Words, not paint.


I dont know. Perhaps I shouldnt have winked at him when I saw him staring. Isnt that what had started it? Or would he have found another reason to do what he did? Either way, he shouldnt have been staring. This is the City. He cant say he hasnt seen enough of that before. Or maybe he hasnt. I dont know. We were only kissing. I suppose its that I wish Franno hadnt been there. Well, thats stu- pidly obvious. What I mean is, I wish it hadnt been where Franno works. That evil little man.
You pussy-ass little snow queen, he had said to Jorge. Why you with that little faggot gringo, anyway, huh man, when you could have a vato like me and shit?
Actually, Id completely forgotten about Franno, that he was there, at least until the man had begun to run his hands over Jorges legs and chest and face, not lovingly or sexily, but brutally, with hatred and spleen and, and, I dont know, with just plain evil. He had wanted to hurt Jorge, I think, more than hed wanted to do the same to me.
Go get your brother, Jorge said, slapping at the man.
Franno was across the room, by the stage. I couldnt call out. The music was too loud and people too many. But he made it easy. At least I had thought he had. He had simply taken the man by his shoul- ders and led him from the room. I dont know. Perhaps I shouldve told him, Franno, what the man had said to me, just before Franno whisked him away, when he squeezed my balls the way he did.
You better run home now, you little faggot-ass bitch. I come back and find you here, you going to be like one dead little faggot.
Perhaps its because I didnt believe him that I didnt tell Franno.
So many people never do what they say.


. . . I opened my door. Across the hall, at a table in an alcove thick with webs and dust, there he sat, sad old Abraham Lincoln. His arm had been blown off. There wasnt even a stump, just a mess of car- tilage and muscle and oozing, gluey blood. He heard me open the door and cocked his head. The look of sadness was still there but the nobility was gone. It was the saddest, most pitiful look I had ever seen, just this shy of weeping maybe, or maybe unbearable shame.


Or maybe it was both. He gazed at me that way for a mument. His cheeks were empty and dark, and so were his eyes, the air was still, the hall was silent as light or dark. I was helpless to touch him, even to reach out or speak. His arm was weeping blood, down the shirt that minutes before had been crisp and white. And he never spoke, only turned back to the alcove. In his hand he held a broken vase. It was full of wine gone bad, you could smell it there in the dryness, potent and rank. Then old Abraham took up the vase and rammed its shards into his mouth. His face split open, I could see the wine spill out and mingle with the blood from his wounds, the ones hed made and the ones hed had. He didnt stop, either. His arm had just been blown off, but he didnt care, he was still alive, a failure it must have seemed, he just kept on drinking. The blood and the wine con- tinued to flow, it was endless, he wouldnt look at me, he just kept on drinking from his broken vase, sad as a man whod never made the grade. Was I me, John Wilkes Booth, or was I him, sad old Abraham Lincoln? I couldnt tell, then. Maybe I was both . . .

The ditch narrowed down as it filed into the culvert where Franno and Timothy and Gentry and June had gone to rest after so much time in the sun. In the culvert there were little pockets of dirt and sand on either side of the stream. They were totting up their catch, comparing what they had caught to who had caught it. Timothy of course had caught the most, the mouse, for instance, and the lizards, and the single baby carp. He was wearing the wig, platinum blond, in the style of Marilyn Monroe. The Fourth of July was only days away. Gentry had wanted to go back to the row of bottles they had made and blow them up with firecrackers. But it was nice in the shade, cool with a breeze, and the others were so tired.
Youre going to get it when Dad sees you, Franno had said to Timothy.
He hadnt said any such thing all day long, he hadnt even thought to say it, there was too much to see and do, the way it is when youre  a kid, when its summertime and everythings sunny and warm and theres soda in the fridge and cake in the cupboard and pillows on


the couch where you watch TV, All in the Family and Adam 12 and Wild Kingdom and Starsky and Hutch, when youre full of homemade enchiladas and rice and beans and mum and Dad are in the yard or maybe just dozing in a chair with a magazine on their lap and wine on the table beside them.
He looks like one of those fake ladies on Saturday Night Live, Gentry said. He wasnt looking at Timothy, just staring into the stream. He looks weird, he said.
Timothy had a tree frog lying on its back on his palm, stroking its belly with his pinkie. The frogs throat was gently pulsing, like maybe its heart was there and not its breath.
I think hes pretty, said June.
How would you know? Gentry said. I just would, she said.
Maybe she would, Franno said. How would you know?
Timothy slipped the frog back under the netting they had stretched across the bucket. But I am, he said, and you could see he believed it. Im pretty.



My brother and I are in the backyard. I am in a lawn chair and he is in a wheelchair. Hes wearing those leather gloves with the fingers cut off that make him look homeless. He says theyre convenient. It wont be long before snow covers all this shit up. Brian passes the joint.
Tell me what you make of this, I say.
Brian looks at me, then back at the leaves. The leaves are the same color as his beard. It feels like a revelation. Its the kind of thing that seems interesting when youre high, but isnt. Make of what? Brian says.
I cant remember. Im thinking about beards: bushy ones, trimmed ones, Abe Lincolns.
Fuck, I say. I dont know.
Howd it go with that girl the other night?
Oh yeah, thats what I was going to tell you about. Tell me what you make of this.
Brian smiles. He likes it when I fuck up.Shoot, he says.
So weve eaten, and the dates been okay so far. I havent offended her or anything. Shes done most of the talking, and Im just trying not to stare at her tits. Shes cute, though, and Ive made her laugh a couple times, nothing big, but, you know. He nods.
So dinners over, were working on the wine, and I feel like its getting to that point in the night where shes gonna want me to


tell her something profound about my life in order to make her feel like weve bonded emotionally so when we fuck it wont just be, you know, cheap or something.
Okay, Brian says.
So she says, Tell me a story in this kind of seductress voice. Now normally this is when I start bullshitting about mum dying, or about some chick that broke my heart.
Should have told her you had a brother in a wheelchair. That would have got her.
Not like I havent used that one before, I say.
We both laugh; we know its true. But thats the point,  I  say. Im sick of all that. Its like a movie Ive seen too many times.
So what did you say?
Well, I start telling her about this guy I met at work. Hes a weird dude. He wears this trenchcoat thats entirely decorated with patches. You know, like, of bands and shit, peace signs. Those type of patches. Iron-ons. His whole trenchcoat is covered in them. There isnt an inch of space on the thing. Now hes working on covering the whole inside with patches too, but hes having trouble finding enough new patches. They all have to be different.
So every couple of months he comes by the store to see if we have any new patches in. We never do, but he still comes by all the time just to check.
Anyways, the first time he came in I thought he was real strange. After all, hes wearing this coat with all the patches. Aside from that too, hes one ugly dude. Seriously: acne, big-ass glasses, greasy hair. But you know, lots of weirdos come into my store, so I dont think much of it. Anyways, the first time he comes in, he asks about the patches and I tell him were out. Instead of leaving he introduces himself and hangs around for a while.
So get to the point, Brian says, although I know he wants me to keep going. He doesnt have shit else to do. You get laid or what?
Hold on, I say, let me tell you about this guy. You never get laid, Brian says.
I get laid sometimes, not often. Brian never gets laid.
So hes still in the store, and he has these huge headphones on,


you know, like the kind they have in recording studios? He asks if I want to hear something he wrote. Im bored, and hes the only cus- tomer, so I say okay.
So I listen to the CD, in his headphones, and its just this repeating four-note bassline with some weird effect on it. I dont know what you call it. Like the bass is going underwater or something. Thats it. Just this bassline. No other instruments or anything.
How long did you listen for?
Well I was trying to be polite, so maybe a minute, two. R ight.
So anyway, he keeps coming back every few weeks with new shit to listen to. And every time its roughly the same thing: basslines. But, you know, I try to be nice.
So you told all this to the chick? Sarah.
Whos Sarah? The chick. Oh, right.
But the storys not over yet. Listen, this goes on for a few months or whatever, maybe hes come by four or five times by this point.
Okay.
So one day he shows up and hes got this backpack. Its morning and the stores empty. He opens it up and there are like fifteen CDs that hes made. Says theyre his albums. Theyre pretty homemade looking, but each one has its own cover art. And not just simple drawings or some shit, Im talking about serious cover art. Like this guy must have spent days drawing all these covers. And the drawings are raw too, all sorts of evil shit, devils goblins, skulls.
So Im sitting there admiring, kind of in awe, right, and he takes out one of the CDs and tells me he made it for me. His Greatest Hits. He wants me to listen to it with him, see what I think.
Sounds like somebody has a little crush on you, Brian says.
So I put the CD in the  stereo  because  I  dont  want  to  break the guys heart, and Im kind of wondering  if maybe  it  wont  just  be basslines this time. CD starts, we listen: basslines. Same shit as always. But whatever, I leave it on, kind of space out. CD keeps going, ten minutes, twenty minutes, whatever. Some customers come in,


and I want to turn it off but I dont. Eventually the customers leave, more come in, the whole time the CD is  still rocking. Were talk-  ing maybe fifteen tracks so far of just bass. And all the basslines are basically the same. Like a tiny bit different, but basically the same. The store empties out again, and Im getting restless and a little frus- trated, so I say to him, real softly, gently-like, These basslines are awesome, man, but have you ever thought about adding any other instruments, or maybe getting a band together, even just putting some of the basslines together to make a song? And he just gives me this look; stares right at me as if Ive told him I fuck his mum up the ass or something. No, he tells me, this is what I do, these are the songs. So now I feel kind of bad, and I just agree with him, tell him  I dont know what the fuck Im talking about.
We keep listening, another two, three tracks. Its been about an hour at this point and were down to the last track. Im looking at the CD case and I notice that this song doesnt have a normal name. Its just a bunch of symbols, like how people swear in comic strips, you know what Im talking about? He says he wants to show me some- thing. He takes out his wallet and pulls out this little piece of paper, must be folded like eight times. He unfolds that shit, and on it theres all these symbols, Greek letters, runes, I dont know what the fuck they are. I think pi was in there somewhere. This, he says, is what this songs about, and its the meaning of life.
Still basslines, Brian says. Still basslines, I say.
But listen. So he tells me this, and then he folds up the paper again and puts it in his pocket, and then he takes off the trenchcoat. He drops the coat to the floor like hes a stripper stepping out of a silk kimono. I dont say a word. He  takes off his shirt, lifts it  over his head, dramatically tosses it. Im not fucking around. He turns around. His back is like acne city, but hes got the symbols tattooed across the entire thingswear to Godburned into his flesh.  And he stands there with his arms spread, and the bassline just thumps.
Brian doesnt seem surprised by the ending to my story and Im disappointed. I feel something wet on my neck and think it might be a snowflake. The tips of Brians fingers are white from cold.
I think its snowing, I say.


Yeah, man.
I watch his hands as he maneuvers his chair around and moves toward the house. The joint has been put out, but our breath is vis- ible like smoke.
You fuck her? Brian asks without turning around. Nah, I say. I didnt feel like it.
I do not tell him that after dinner we took a cab back to her place. That we fucked each others brains out. That I couldnt sleep. That I woke her in the middle of the night and felt the urge to tell her about my brother, his atrophied legs, or the way when I bathe him he closes his eyes and hums. Instead I whispered, It was nothing, go back to sleep, and waited, watched the ceiling fan revolve until her breath became gentle and I could slip on my jeans and disappear.
Brian reaches the house. I step in front and open the door, holding it until hes inside. I press my palm against the glass of the sliding door so it makes a print. Then I follow.




Your feet are tired from waiting tables all day, but its late Friday night, your favorite time to shop at the super-duper Walmart. You find a couple of things you need to try on for size. You walk to the fitting room. No attendant. The stalls are empty. You walk down the corridor until you reach number seven and enter it. You read the new sign tacked on the shiny gray wall: Shoplifting is not a prank, or a joke. It is a crime. Even for a first offense, you can serve jail time and pay fines up to $2000. So please, dont incriminate yourself. It will haunt you for the rest of your life.
You struggle to zip the distressed, size nine Faded Glory jeans. Damn birth control pills are making you fat, but babies are prepos- terous. When you look into the mirror and see a twenty-seven-year- old bloated babe, you wince. But sex is still your best weapon in your ongoing battle with the Dick Squad, which you usually win, espe- cially since you lowered your sights good and low. Rob thinks youre letting yourself go to the dogs already. You met him three months ago, but it feels like a couple of lifetimes. He teases you about going to cosmetology school. Fuck him and all his uncles. One fine shim- mering day, you will be a great hair artist.
You pull the purple sleeveless shell from the hanger, slip it over


your blond hair. Your auburn roots are two inches long. Being blond hasnt improved diddly damn squat. The purple shirt shows off the red tongue on your Rolling Stones tattoo. You turn your tattooed arm toward the mirror, look over your shoulder, and wink at yourself. You rip the tags from the shirt and jeans, stuff them in your pocket.
You grab the hanger with the Tweety Bird nightshirta gift for your daughters birthdayyou can afford thatits only $8.92.
As you turn to leave the dressing room, you notice the last sen- tence on the Shoplifting is not a prank sign: It will haunt you for the rest of your life. You grab your Cosmos Caf ink pen, and write in big block letters: IF YOU GET CAUGHT. Then you waltz with the Tweety Bird shirt all the way to the checkout. You pull out your last ten dollars and pay the oily-haired cashier. He hands you two shiny quarters. On your way out, you drop them in the vending machine. An icy can of Walmart cola clangs to the bottom. You pop the top and guzzle it, pretending it tastes like the real thing.
	Daughter
What mothers dont know, they sure cant tell you. And since your mama kept what she did know to herself, well then, Little Pilgrim, you really got screwed. She never talked about herself, what she thought, what she wanted. She quoted the Bible like she wrote it. She prayed like Jesus in the wilderness.
The word strong comes to mind. The word enigma comes to mind. The word facade comes to mind. The word frozen comes to mind. The word martyr comes to mind. The word trapped comes to mind. The word unfucked comes to mind.
Admit it. Your mama is a cave of imponderable desires. What she didnt know then and perhaps never will:

	Sex is the cake, not the icing.
	Gods love aint enough.
	If its anywhere, Heaven is Here.
	The neighbors dont give a shit.
	Blasphemer
*	*	*


God adores transvestites and the inventor of the donut. He marvels at little girls and wishes he were a boy. His favorite tree is loblolly pine. He bites his toenails. He hates like hell being an orphan. Hes proud of thumbs and long sharp thorns, but mourns every detached fore- skin. He loathes bananas and snorts angel dust. Hes afraid of subma- rines and zebras. He regrets inventing sorrow, but waxes rhapsodic about the perfect weakness of gravity. Plus he really digs brunettes. You know the SECRETS OF GOD. Go aheadtell every damn one.
	Exhibitionist
If theres a gene for exhibitionist, you have it. From an early age, you loved to shock people. Thats why you begged for those tap dancing lessons. If you make enough noise, some damn body will notice you. Thats all you ever wanted. Your mama, God bless her, wanted you   to be a saint or a preacher, but your talents veered off in the opposite direction. You make shit up right out of the air. You see colors around people. Your daddy has that chartreuse neon glow and your mama shimmers with lavender light. Their colors look like shit together. You dont understand why certain people are attracted to each other like helpless creatures. Carl Jung called it the anima and animus. You had to read that chapter three times before you understood the eso- teric theorythat each of us carries an ideal image of the opposite sex in our psychesthat waits like a stick of dynamite to be lit by someone who resembles it. Just like your mama and daddy. Kaboom! Day and Night. Field and Plow. Moon and Sun. Your mama a fresh ream of paper, your daddy a bottle of indelible ink.
	Sous Chef
Your Recipe for Sorrow:

	vile clock
	pounds of regret 1 secret revealed
4 petrified dreams
3 shitty smiles
8 hateful words


1 biting sentence
2.5 paltry  excuses 10 liters of sweet lies

Stir all the ingredients. Let dough rise for three days. Spread it out on a giant cookie sheet. Sprinkle with sea salt. Bake until crunchy. Crumble into pieces. Fling it to the yawing crows.
For twenty years youve been a poet, but youve never written a single poem about your deepest, ugliest, most unacknowledged phantom your dear old man, braver than the bottlestronger than nicotines ugly gripthe Big Star in the Silent Movie of Your Lifethe man who never hugged you, who drunkenly fell down and often couldnt get up, who cursed in his sleep, who never saw your despair because he was too damn intoxicated with his own. By the time you were born, he was a quart-of-whiskey-sad daddy, who lived in a pup tent pitched in Hell. Go ahead. Admit it. You owe him your poetic license.
All night long you committed adultery with an old lover as gorgeous as he was fifteen years ago when you fell in love. You  couldnt help  it: his desire shockingyour hunger shamelessyour tongues like wicks of candles burning into each other. You were in an unknown bed, in an unknown room, in an unknown hotel, in an unknown cityhell, it wasnt even in this world.
Oh, the smell of lovers love being made like patchoulitwo fine glowing bodies praising God and the eternal fucking mument.  As in life, there were intruders: aunts, uncles, his wife, your husband, sniffing around the bed as if you were invisible. I think you were, praise Godbecause they didnt stop you. You clung to each other, his sweat like warm honey you licked from his chest.
Do you remember how you crawled under that huge blue bed and preached fiery sermons to your congregation of dust bunnies? Do you


remember how you pleaded with your mum when she drove too fast? Your red hair sprung from your head like fresh cedar shavings. Your bright morning face clouded by worried eyes as you admonished her Swow down, mummy.
You were the first miracle in that small town hell of hers. A bubble of perfection she endeavored to keep from bursting when you came into contact with all the sharp objects flying around her. Your bubble never popped. The sun forced its rays through your resilient mem- brane revealing your spectacular colors while the wind whispered your secret names: Yellow maiden, Purple poet, Green girl, Red sur- prise, Orange dream, White peacock, Black butterfly. Once and for all, you need to set the record straight. The stories about how you came into this world have been so poorly told that even now you dont understand that, from the mument you popped out of her womb, you have been a bridgenever an obstaclethe final blue answer to the question, What is love?


As soon as I came out of my house at 6 Agho Street on the March morning, someone shouted in my direction: Hold the debtor! Dont let her run away.  Hold the debtor! Without looking at the person,    I knew it was Gomo. In the night of the day before, he sent a note through my sister, Janet, saying that Id borrowed money from him six months ago, money meant to treat the burns on my face and arms, but I did not want to pay it back. What did I think he was? A Father Christmas? He would get his money from me in the morning even if all the people in Benin City pleaded that he should leave me alone.
After reading the letter, I tore it, and Janet asked why. Did I not know that, when Gomo was like this, he would carry out his threats? I told her: Gomo cannot do more than a harmless rat. By the time he comes, Ill be at the bus stop for the journey to Abuja. I told her that Gomo, like the drunkard he was, would be too busy sleeping when I began my journey and that Janet should forget him. Unfor- tunately, Gomo surprised me, as he woke much earlier from his usual drunken slumber. And I knew all the prayers to Jesus Christ would not make him give me more time to pay my debts.
Despite this, I decided not to run and headed toward the bus stop, about eight hundred meters away. Gomo, shouting at the top of his voice, caught up with me before I covered ten meters. By this time, some of the women living on Agho Street, attracted by Gomos voice,


trooped out of their houses. Mama Sarah, a woman who owned the provision store next door, ran toward us. Mama Johnson tied her wrapper around her waist and came out to the street. Though men did not come out, some of them were disturbed by the scene. One man opened his mouth so wide that his chewing stick fell out of his mouth to the ground. As he bent to pick it, I turned to Gomo.
Ill pay you when I come back from Abuja, I told him.
Thats been your story for the past six months! Gomo shouted. Is that what Ill tell Mama Gbenga when she comes for her money?  I want my money now.
Mama Sarah told him to have pity on me; after all, Mama Gbenga had traveled, and I never used to owe money before I was wounded and disfigured by a kerosene explosion two years ago. Mama Johnson told him he should have the milk of human kindness and allow me to go on my trip.
Will the milk of human kindness save me from Mama Gbenga? Gomo shrieked.
So you dont want to forgive and forget? asked Mama Sarah.  All right, well see.
Before I knew it, the women grabbed Gomo. Mama Sarah pulled at the belt of his trousers, swearing, demanding the money for the bottle of beer he bought on credit for his girlfriend. Mama Johnson pulled at his dirty shirt and said: Where is the money for the stick of cigarette you bought from me two weeks ago? As they dragged Gomo from one side of the road to the other, he loosened his grip on my black blouse, and I pushed his hand away.
While this happened, I hoped more people would not waylay me. Gomo was not the only person I owed since the kerosene explosion, and the fear of harassment kept me on edge every time. Even now, if a dog barked too loudly, I jumped, thinking one of my creditors had come to say, Abuja, where is my money? If I heard a knock at my door, I scurried under the bed, thinking the landlord had come to collect his rent, which I could not pay because Id lost my job over  the burns.
These hassles frequently angered me. We had bought adulterated kerosene from government filling stations. Then it had exploded,


scarred our faces, made us lose our jobs, and turned us into paupers. Government officials promised to help us; instead they abandoned us, leaving us to fend for ourselves. Have they done the right thing by allowing us to live like sewage rats?
The Abuja issue came six months ago. Our leader, a man called El- dorado, told us that God had at last answered our prayers, that some doctors from America wanted to carry out surgery on our burns in Abuja. We would not pay anything; it was free. Since then, I became hopeful that my scars would go away. When the boys in Agho Street laughed at me over my scarred face and arms, I gloated, saying I would soon look better than they did, and that everything would be corrected in Abuja.
I spoke so much about Abuja that the area boys changed my name from Mabel to Abuja. I first learned this a month ago. As I walked  to the bus stop for a ride to town, one of my most stubborn credi- tors, a man called Tolu Player, stopped me. Before I could speak, he waved his hands as though he did not want to listen to more stories. Thats why theyre calling you Abuja. I dont want to hear about any surgery. Just give me my two hundred naira. Another of my credi- tors, Oviedo, a woman selling secondhand brassieres at the nearby New Market, came to meet me at home, and said, Abuja, where is my money? The day for the journey to Abuja had come, but I was having problems.
As I hurried down the street, pulling away from Gomo and the women harassing him, I struggled to overcome my disbelief I could catch the Abuja-bound bus. People trooped into the street as though they were ants coming out of their anthills, and many of them were my creditors. Any of them could stop me and say, Hey! Abuja, where is my money? or say that they wanted to use it to pay the second- term school fees of their son or hire a band for the second burial of their great grandmother, wasting the time I could use to catch the bus.
There was another reason for the doubts that crept into my mind. I was so anxious not to miss the Abuja bus that I woke by three at night, staring at the ceiling of my room till five, growing weak from lack of adequate sleep. When Janet came and saw me, she said that my


eyes were as swollen as a frogs and my hands shook as though I suf- fered from fever. I told her I was all right. But as the minutes passed, weakness overtook me, and pains from the burns on my face and arms overwhelmed me, making me fall asleep again. When I woke up, Janet, who returned from morning prayers at a church nearby, said it was seven, and I knew it would be difficult catching the Abuja bus.
But I could not afford missing it. If I did, Janet would call me a careless fool. Was it because she provided me with three square meals daily that I did not find it necessary to cure myself, start work, and begin feeding myself again? How could I afford missing the only real opportunity for cure to  my  burns? If my  best friend, Agnes, heard I missed the bus, she would say, Ah, ah, Abuja, how can you allow this to happen? I was in hot soup. My creditors would say I was care- less, and they would no longer have pity on me. My fellow tenants, if they heard, would say the witches that caused the kerosene explosion in the first place still dogged my life, and that I suffered from home trouble.
I was inclined toward believing the last view. My father had taught me that when a woman sneezed, a witch was behind it. I believed him. Were it not so, how did it come about that I bought the killer kerosene when so many other people purchased the original one? Was it not because a witch put a spell on me? And now, on the day I was to go to Abuja for surgery, I was overwhelmed by fatigue because I had not slept long enough and had to sleep again. Was it not because my enemies wanted me not to travel? As I walked up the street, I wondered whether it was possible to overcome the witches on this all-important day.
While these thought troubled me, I looked up the road and saw Tolu Player. As soon as I spotted him, I was filled with panic. Why should he appear on the day I wanted to travel? At the same time,     I was furious. How long would I continue to shake like a cold fowl when I saw my creditors on the streets of Benin City? Was this not why I must travel, no matter what happened? And a little fighting spirit flowed into me.
When Tolu Player stopped in front of me, he scowled, and I knew at once he wanted to ask for his two hundred naira and would not


take no for an answer. His scowl was so frightful, Mama Sarah, had she seen it, would have asked: Why are you frowning as if an ant has bitten your face? His shirt looked rough and threadbare, the kind the small boys in Agho Street called Okrika, the kind my former boy- friend, Cletus, would wear over his dead body. Tolus pair of shoes was old and dusty, as though dust settled on them after he trekked tens of kilometers. Had Agnes seen him, she would have asked why he always trekked on the road and could not board a bus once in a while. Was he the only one in Benin City who did not have money?
To make matters worse, Tolu was not only a debtor but also never paid his debts. He once owed Mama Sarah three hundred naira, money owed for the bottle of beer he bought for his girlfriend. When Mama Sarah asked him for it, he said he would pay her the next day. When the next day arrived, he promised to pay the next one. Exasper- ated after six months, Mama Sarah shouted at him: Will tomorrow tomorrow never end? That was how Tolu acquired the nickname Tomorrow Tomorrow Never End. Even as he stood in front of me,   I was not sure he had paid Mama Sarahs debt.
Staring at me, he cleared his voice. Wheres my money, Abuja? he asked.
I told you Ill pay you when I come back from my surgery op- eration.
Before I could stop him, he grabbed my hand, twisted it, and re- moved the bag I hung on my shoulder, pushing me out of the way.
When you come back from Abuja, come and take your bag.
I grabbed his shirt and shouted: Give me my bag! Give me my bag!
What is happening there? Mama Sarah, who still held Gomos trousers, hollered.
I told her that Tolu had seized my bag because I hadnt paid him his money. Leaving Gomo to Mama Johnson, Mama Sarah headed toward me and Tolu, who struggled to push me away as soon as he heard Mama Sarahs voice. Succeeding, he took to his heels, heading up the street. But he did not see a cement block in his way, and he tripped over it, shouting as he crashed to the dusty street.
Groaning, he got to his feet. Dust stained the side of his face and


left arm, and he looked like a dirty masquerade. His shirt was also stained by dust, and its top right pocket was torn. He staggered on his feet when Mama Sarah grabbed him by the belt of his trousers.
Wheres my three hundred naira? she demanded. I want it now.
Why are you doing this to me, Mama Sarah?
Just then someone shouted on the street: Thats him! Tomorrow Tomorrow Never Ends!
Turning, I looked up the road and saw two men run toward us, shouting at the top of their voices. I knew one of them, a man the  area boys on Agho Street called the Leader. Though he had no job,  he drove a sleek Mercedes and always seemed to be in money. It was rumored that he was the leader of a ruthless moneylending group operating in the area. Also, he owned a dog named Bingo, a fearsome- looking animal that barked anytime I returned home late at night, only restrained from jumping at me  by  the gate  locked  against it. As the Leader and his friend reached us, Bingo bounded down the  street, tail wagging, his leash trailing on the ground. Seeing the dog, I shifted away from Mama Sarah and Tolu.
You can run but you can never hide, the Leader said to Tolu. Give me more time, Tolu  told  him.  Ill  pay  the  money. The Leader turned to Bingo and picked up the leash.
Get him! he commanded.
Bingo barked at Tolu, and fear gripped me. Had I heard such a bark when I returned home at night, I would never have come late again. The big dog lunged in Tolus direction, and the debtor cried, held out  a  hand against the dog,  and dropped my  traveling bag  to a nearby patch of grass. Mama Sarah had left him since she saw the dog. She now jumped over a gutter, almost falling, and disappeared into the courtyard of the bungalow opposite us, shouting at the top of her voice. Mama Johnson ran after her friend, holding the end of her wrapper with one hand to keep it from falling to the street. One man ran down the street, yelling Bingo wanted to make a meal of Tolu.
But the dog did not get to Tolu. The Leader pulled back the leash while it jumped, and Tolu leaped away. Getting to his knees, he


pleaded he would get the money that very afternoon. A  woman in the next street owed him and promised to pay by twelve. The Leader would get it immediately after, and he should forgive Tolu for not paying as it would not happen again.
Get his shirt, Gatecrasher! the Leader said to his companion. When he pays his money hell get it back!
Gatecrasher gave a wolfish grin and closed in on his prey. Had Janet seen his chest, she would have said, Thats the chest of a wres- tler. Gatecrashers arms were big, and his biceps rippled with mus- cles. Gatecrasher looked like the kind of men found lurking around street corners and seedy drinking joints. He grabbed Tolu by the arm and wanted to kick his legs off the ground. Tolu dodged, flailed his hands, begging, saying he would pay the money in the afternoon.
Kneel down! Gatecrasher roared.
When Tolu hesitated, Gatecrasher clenched his fist and raised it in the air, aiming to smash it down the debtors head, but Tolu pleaded. He would get the money without fail. Still raising his fist in the air, Gatecrasher ordered him to remove his shirt and put it in his palm im- mediately. But I did not want to witness more of this. My bag lay on the sand five meters from me, so I ran to it, grabbed it, and sprinted up the street. Bingo barked, and Tolu yelled from Gatecrashers blow, but I did not stop, dashing toward the nearest street corner.
By this time, the sun had climbed a quarter of its way up the sky, and I felt the beads of sweat that broke out on my face. Worried about the sun, I quickened my footsteps, noting only a little breeze blew, unlike at dawn when it blew strongly. As I turned a  corner  and stepped into a new street, I caught a whiff of iodine in the air.     I feared the smell because it caused me to gasp, and I hurried down the street, intent on getting to the bus stop as quickly as possible. But when I got to the middle of the street, I frowned. Oviedo, the woman who sold secondhand brassieres to women living in Agho Street, marched toward me.
An inner voice told me to run, that I stood the chance of getting to Abuja if this woman did not stop me. I was about to run, but another voice said I should not risk it, that I was without my usual strength. Who knew what would happen if I ran? Perhaps I might collapse to


the road, canceling the trip altogether, leaving me at the mercy of people like Oviedo, Tolu Player, and Gomo permanently. I decided not to run, to risk facing Oviedo, who stopped in front of me.
A very fat woman in her midforties, Oviedo was a legendary figure in Agho Street. People rumored that shed sat on her husband during a fight and the poor man could not stand up after the incident. He had to be rushed to the hospital where doctors revived him. Another account said that hed stood up after the fight, but he began to sweat, farting as though his wifes weight had punctured his internal organs. Still another woman, giving her account of the incident, said that Oviedo had taken him to the hospital after the fight and told him: Next time you disobey me, Ill beat you, sit on you, and youll never stand up again. But one thing was clear in all the accounts: Oviedo had beaten her husband, she had sat down on him, and he could not get up. It was rumored that she hated people referring to the issue.
At first, she did not see me, and she spoke to herself as she lum- bered up the street, abusing someone who owed her and refused to pay the debt, that she would sit on her and she would not get up. Looking to my side of the street, she saw me, and she hardened her face. I felt like running again, not wanting the massive woman to sit on me, but I felt I could not risk it, so I stopped and faced her.
Wheres the money, Abuja? she demanded. Let me come back, Ill give it to you.
Come back when? she roared. Never! You must pay me now, or Ill sit on top of you.
She veered toward me, and I shouted. It attracted people who sat in the courtyard of a nearby bungalow, and one man stood up, jumped over the gutter beside his chair, and came toward us. He pleaded with Oviedo that she should sympathize with me. Did she not know that if she sat on me I could choke to death? Did she think she could sell secondhand brassieres to the women living in the area again if I died? Oviedo asked him: If I leave her, will you pay her debt? When the man did not answer, Oviedo told him to leave her alone or she would sit on him as well.
As the exchange went on, a small crowd, attracted by it, stood a few meters from us, silent. Joe, the local wit, stood in the crowd,


making fun of Oviedo. Leave them alone, he told her. Do  you want to send them to the hospital?
Are you talking to me? Oviedo asked.
No, said Joe. Im talking to the fat woman who sits on people. Ill teach you to stop interfering in other peoples business, Oviedo said with anger and headed toward him. But she stepped on a slippery pond in the way, staggered, and fell down, staining her white lace blouse and wrapper. The crowd laughed, Joes voice sounding above the rest. Angered, Oviedo swore under her breath and stood
up from the pond, beating her dress.
This will teach you to stop sending people to the hospital, Joe said to her.
Yelling, Oviedo stepped out of the pond and ran toward Joe, people scattering in all directions. One mans cap fell off his head as he ran, but he did not stop to pick it from the ground, fearing that Oviedo would pounce on him if he did. Joe took off up the street, yelling that Oviedo wanted to sit on him when hed done nothing, and was it now a law that she should harass innocent people?
As Joe ran away, I glanced at the sun. It had climbed farther up the sky, its heat increasing. Already, the surface of the burns on my hands was swollen; if I did not leave the sun, they would crack and blood could seep out of the wound. If blood appeared, it would not cease flowing, and I might as well forget about the journey, since it would drip all the way to Abuja, discomfiting me and causing nausea to everyone in the bus through its smell. To  make matters worse,  the morning air was still, and I found it difficult to breathe. If I did at all, I smelled iodine, which meant my condition was desperate. I checked my timethirty minutes to ten. If I did not move now, I was in danger of losing the bus.
Anger over my situation flowed over me once more. Why should government allow people like us to buy adulterated  kerosene  from its fuel stations, making us suffer from its explosion? Were we the ones who adulterated the kerosene or owned the petrol stations? Why would government officials say on the radio and television that the victims were taken care of, that they had not been abandoned and left to suffer? Were they taking care of me when I had to borrow money from a Shylock like Oviedo so I would not die from my wounds?


I knew wed been abandoned because no one wanted to take blame for selling the kerosene. When we met the governor, he had asked us whether we were sure wed bought the adulterated kerosene from the petrol stations. At the petrol stations, the owners said that we hadnt bought the kerosene from them, that wed gotten it from sharp road- side traders who mixed kerosene and petrol together in order to make quick profit. They were the ones to blame for our troubles and we should go and complain to them. One petrol station owner even said: You people should be punished for patronizing touts. Youre all en- emies of progress!
At meetings with government officials, we would tell them, Were suffering. But they would sayespecially the chairman of the explo- sion victims task force, a man we called Sufferheadthat they were suffering too, and had not been paid their salaries for three months. They could not pay the school fees of their children and found it dif- ficult eating three square meals a day. Their landlords visited them the previous day for rent and threatened to throw their properties to the streets if they did not pay before the end of the week. Their wives had lost their jobs just the day before and they did not know how they could cope with family expenses.
We were also abandoned by many people living in Agho Street. When I asked for money from a few of them who were not money- lenders, they would shake their heads, sigh, and begin to tell sto- ries. They could not do much, I should know,  because they were  not government people, who had no problems with their childrens school fees, ate three square meals a day, and generally lived off the fat of the land. These people were all corrupt and selfish. A revolu- tion organized by good people should come and f lush the rats into the sea.
And that is the summary of my story in the past two yearsuntil Eldorado, our chairman, told us that some American doctors wanted to treat all of us in Abuja free of charge. The American doctors, thanks to Obama, would even give us stipends for the exercise. But now the Abuja trip was in danger, due to events I did not foresee a day back.
As I hurried to the bus stop, I wondered why I was not yet there, something that seemed so easy a day ago. I remembered how, when


Gomo appeared just as I got out of my house, my inner voice told me to run, and how Id disobeyed the voice, thinking of the pains from my burns and fatigue. I recalled how Tolu Player stopped in front of me and the voice told me to run at once and I did not. And I remem- bered how, when fat Oviedo appeared and asked for her money, I looked at her like a fool because I feared to take to my heels.
At that mument, I felt the intense heat of the sun on my burns, and I glanced at my hands. They were more red than they ever were, and if I wasted any more time in the sun blood would seep out of them. It might mean good-bye to Abuja and more of the rat race with Oviedo, Tolu Player, Gomo and the others. I was convinced this could happen when I smelled more iodine and felt my stomach heave. If it got to   be too much, I would have to sit down under a shade somewhere so    I wouldnt faint, meaning I would waste more time.
And then I thought of what my father told mewhen a woman sneezed, a witch was behind it. I knew this was at the back of my mind, weakening my resolve to solve the situation. But when the inner voice told me to run, was it a witch telling me to stand? If I said it was to the small boys living on our street, will they not ask, Did a witch put a wedge between your legs? I remembered when Oviedo appeared and I could have run but did not; was it a witch that whis- pered into my ears I should not run? If I told Agnes it was a witch, would she not ask, laughing, whether a witch had tied a piece of rope around my ankles?
Thinking about this, I checked my watch and found I had ten minutes left to get to the bus stop. If Gomo, Oviedo, Tolu Player, or any other creditor arrived, I vowed to run because I suspected it was the only way out. After making this vow, I turned the corner into the road leading to the bus stop but stopped. Gomo stood twenty meters down the street.
Sixty meters behind him, I saw the bus taking us to Abuja parked under a mango tree, but I knew Gomo could intersect my path before I get to the vehicle, so I decided to be cautious.
I knew youll pass here, Gomo told me. Thats why I came to stand here.
He looked terrible. Even though he constantly harassed me over


his money, I was shocked by his appearance. I wanted to ask him, with a straight face: Gomo! Who beat you like this? But  I  did not; instead, I stared at him. His torn green shirt revealed a chest stained by caked mud and charcoal, making him look no better than a madman. Had it not been that I knew him, and was desperate to catch the bus, I would have turned back and taken to my heels, shout- ing that people should save me from a madman. His trousers were stained by sand and dust as though hed fallen into a pond, or rather, as if Mama Sarah and Mama Johnson pushed him into a gutter. He reminded me of the pig that came to the back of our yard, grunt-  ing, foraging through the yam peeling, rubbish, and rotted plants  we dumped there. The children living on Agho Street, had they seen him like this, would have said that Gomo had suddenly gone crazy and stayed away from him. But since I was aware of my mission, I decided not to stay away.
Wont you leave the road and allow me to pass? I asked him.
He coughed and pointed a forefinger to the ground like a native doctor who buried a charm in the soil.
I want my money today, he said. If I dont get it youre not  going anywhere.
Behind him, I saw three women come up the street, but I did not bother to look at them because I was thinking of how to run past Gomo.
I promise you, when I come back from Abuja, Ill pay you, I told him.
Are you deaf? he shouted. I said I want my money now. I bor- rowed the money to you in Benin City. I know about Benin City. I dont know about Abuja!
What is happening there? one of the three women, who had got to where we stood, demanded, and I recognized her. She was Mama Gbenga, the woman Gomo spoke about earlier in the morning. It  was rumored that Gomo had borrowed some money from her, saying he wanted to use it for the burial ceremony of his mother, but used it to run after women and drink beer up and down Agho Street. Mama Sarah told me that Gomo had jumped out the window of his room two days ago when Mama Gbenga surprised him and came to his


house. Agnes told me that Gomo would be in soup if Mama Gbenga ever caught up with him. Now that she had, I was afraid it could complicate matters for me, as she would ask for her money and Gomo would insist that I pay him. I might miss the bus in the course of the trouble.
Gomo! Mama Gbenga yelled, Wheres my money?
Thats what Im looking for now, Gomo replied in a subdued voice. Once I get it from Abuja, Ill give it to you.
Was that our agreement? No, but . . . 
Hold him! Mama Gbenga said to her friends. Immediately.
Before Gomo could run, the two women with Mama Gbenga grabbed him by the shirt. Turning, he stretched out his hand and grabbed my blouse. At the same time, the driver of the bus taking  us to Abuja stepped out of a bungalow down the street and waddled toward the vehicle. One of us, a woman called Lizzy Babe, ran down the street after him.
While this happened, Mama Gbenga shouted at Gomo that hed lied to her. Hed promised to pay his debt within a week, but had not done so after three years. What did he think she was? His mother? If he did not pay her at once, she would strip him naked, take his clothes to the nearest secondhand trader in New Benin Market, and sell them.
As she droned on, the feeling that I would lose the bus grew inside me. Could my father be right? I thought. When a woman sneezed, a witch was behind it! Could someone somewhere not want me to go for the surgery operation that would cure me of my pains?
While I mused on this, Mama Gbenga began to beat Gomos  hand. Leave her! she shouted. What has she done to you? Leave her alone!
The other women joined her, trying to make Gomo loosen his grip on my hand. After a few seconds, I was free. The f irst thought coming to me was that no witch stood in my way to Abuja. At that mument, I felt the heat of the sun on my burns, and I knew that blood could seep out at any mument, but I did not care. Without thinking of my fatigue, or the weakness that came from not having


a proper sleep the previous night, I  ran toward the bus, shouting  at the top of my voice. The bus moved as I got to its side; but I stretched out my hand, beating the window several times, scream- ing, saying that the bus should stop, and one of my mates saw me and told the driver, who brought the bus to a screeching halt.


Blood violence. Scrying violence. Schools doors locked door to door. Homes surrounded with a netting. Pastries rolled up with the asp. Tomahawks in hands of children come down on dolls and friends, come down on ants, come down on me. Fathers kill their fathers and their sons. Sons kill their friends. Wives kill their husbands and their doctors. They kill the babies in their guts. War violence in the home. Sky violence writing itself white into the cover of the hour with the screens electrifying prismlight. What would have been watched in place of doing is become doing. Runes are written on the heads. Lawns are cut in slurs or glyph stakes, calling for the meteor or blank invasion. A burning planted somewhere in every city near the homes. The wash of the bathwater on the drowned self. The pills. The pills  to erupt the cells out of the body. The naked turned to breadloaves. The football hero with the Luger to his temple on the fifty-yard line. The banker handing back a withdrawal in the form of a sheet of his own skin. Gas station attendants robbing the customers of their con- sciousness. Of blood. The dogs walking the dogs. What is happen- ing in America? The homeland commissioner is up in arms. We must act now. This is our home. The black rabbit in the east sky rises and eats a column of dust onto the air. Troops deployed in precaution of

The Beginning of  t he Summat ion of Our Dead	69
the nature of the coming people stab each other in the chests. Intes- tine dinners. Ageless, graceless. The face of God: torn in strips off of a billboard and used to wrap the dead. This is an art project, some- one stutters, and the teeth fall out of their mouth onto the ground and are eaten by the starving some days later. Enamel over all. Video game machines going blank. Wires doing blank. Email reading these same words in every head. A package is delivered to the homeland commissioner and he opens it on live TV, knowing it will explode. The dogs names are changed to Darrel. The childrens names are changed to Darrel. The nations name is changed to Darrel. Michael Jacksons name is changed to Darrel. Human instances of  Darrel are made piggish, crucified inside the streets as nonbelievers. The name of Darrel in the mass of names is something else. The days. The occasionally clean are surrounded by their own flesh and bone. No metaphor left behind. No building not written whitely with the curse word over the crush of any city now called Darrel. Order again is demanded. Vegetable delivery is mandated by the state to arrive each evening in a long white limousine. This we believe in, which makes us calmer. It does not happen. Another 340,000 die. Another 417,550. Another 589,000. The rising numbers count themselves in blue of pigs blood in cursive on the sky below the blank where there might have been a moon once, and still might be, though we cant remember where to look. The instance of the number is attacked by Air Force bombers to obliterate as smoke. The smoke maintains the will of concrete underneath the clusterbomb. The fallout rains us birds. We eat them. The flesh of the bird delivers word. A mechanic kills a man whos come to have his wheel replaced; he kills using the machine of his daily labor; another day he might have simply changed the wheel. Someone is counting on the fingers of those who pass him in the street. Something underneath the street puts the sound in cats mouths and the houses rub where none of them touch. Someone with a hammer appears in one in 144 houses in one evening, mimick- ing at once a series of different people in one body, tolling the present number of the murdered bodies higher. There is no going backward. The faster we die we all will die. Sickness is not a shaking but a way of looking across a breakfast table or giving thanks. Anywhere this

70	Blake Butler
does not happen yet, the air remains. Turnips in fields turn up with dried blood centers. The trees bow down to kiss the ground. 700,010 dead. 880,789 dead. Telephones. Locks sold from the hardware sta- tion come without a key. Each four killed make eight kill eight more and then kill themselves or kill another set of eight, bodies branch- ing off of each eight killed kill at least sixteen or toward twenty-four, each body desisted initiates a system in the spool of those surround- ing by physical creation or by name, or by walking past the wrong place in the right street in an hour of the wake or having heard; not by plague or viral idea or passion or brutal ministry or campaign, but by something theyve not named but has a name, and in the un- naming of the so named the day goes on and renders shorter while the skin flies at the light above in reams of hiss and collects in lath- ered wreaths around a something unseen around a something. The remaining bodies of their living go on tasting each others body in their mouth in the bite of the chew of the grand air and the cerebral matter of waking up and laying to bed. The colors of us giving up only one color, of little sex. The cars turning themselves on. A day to come of old form. Crystal visions. Winking paper. So ends the begin- ning of our summation of the dead.


Israel, my father said. He was an oral surgeon. It was December and I was getting a Hanukkah present. Two whole weeks! my mother added. She was a mother. She packed my bags: a two-month supply of tampons stashed in Ziplocs and tucked into my shoes, yards upon yards of floss, a pepper-spray key chain, and a family-pack of Dove soap, which, she always said, was pH-balanced for my vagina. I was sixteen. I knew by this time in my life that she did not mean my vagina, but a whole community of vaginas in need of balanced cleans- ing, to which, by virtue of my own parts, I apparently belonged.
It was 1986. It was New Jersey. I had Madonna posters on my bedroom walls, though I distrusted Madonna; she was loud and crass and seemed, well, fake. I was embarrassed by the particular way she put her hands on herself in her  videos. But  Id  needed  something to replace the Kristy McNichol posters Id had  on  my  walls since the seventies. Kristy McNichol had always struck me as trustworthy: she skateboarded and had played someone named Buddy on TV, and her pain struck me as the real deal. Once, when I was in elementary school, Id sent her a letter telling her to be careful, since Id seen some of the kids who had to have dental work done in my dads office after they fell off their skateboards, and she sent me a 3-D poster of herself on a skateboard and cellophane glasses I could use to look at her from my bed. But Kristy McNichol was old news. And though


I was without doubt a weird kid, I wasnt stupid or developmentally out of whack or anything. I knew how to masturbate, hypothetically, and even had a name for my vagina. My friend Sarah and I had come up with it in middle school,  when  we  realized that the three girls  in our grade named Jodi with an i (there were none with a y) were totally alike: they all wore frilly clothes, they were all dog-faced, and all the boys liked them and chased them around at bar mitzvah parties. Just like a vagina, Id said, and so Sarah said Like your vagina, which is how mine got the name. Jodi.
Id always liked nicknames. Madonna was not a nickname, but Buddy wasand I thought it was a  pretty good  nickname, as long  as it was attached to a  girl. While this is not  necessarily true now,  at the time, whenever I thought about nicknames, I thought about vaginas. Maybe it was Sarahs fault, though Sarah had stopped hang- ing out with me sometime around the start of eighth grade. By then Id learned the difference between a vagina and the other parts, so I also named my other part: Heidi Clitowitz. Id chosen a nickname for myself, too. It was Misha. Misha was a Russian bear from the Moscow Olympics, an exclusive bit of knowledge Id picked up from a girl in the neighborhood whod been to Tel Aviv when American televisions had banned the games, but theyd been broadcast in Israel over the Jordanian station. Id never seen Misha; I just liked the sound of it. The problem with nicknames, at least as far as I understood them at the time, was that someone else had to make them up for youyou couldnt give one to yourself. So, as with the bear, no one knew about my nickname. Everyone called me Michelle.
It was 1986, almost 1987, and I was going on a two-week winter- break trip to Israel with a whole bunch of other Jewish kids from the Tri-State Region. Somebody was bound to know somebody, though when I waited in line to check my bags at the El Al counter, I didnt recognize anyone. I found my parents in the waiting area, where they were sitting side by side in a row of those airport chairs that had coin- operated televisions on the armrests. My mum and dad still had their puffy coats on, and they were wedged into their seats so tightly they were more or less immobile from the necks down. Once my parents snagged their seats, they really liked to keep them. When I got closer


I saw they were both nodding at a woman in a fur coat who sat across from them on a regular old plastic bench. She needed the space: she was big, and the coat made her bigger.
Michelle, this is Rhonda Seligson, my mother said, gesturing with her head towards the fur-coat lady.
No, Carol, its Lowenthal now, the woman corrected. She lifted her hand and wiggled a few fingers in my direction.
To us youll always be a Seligson,  my  mother  insisted. To  me she said, Your father and I know Rhonda from camp. Her brother Danny was my wonderful swim instructor for five summers.
My fathers eyes had wandered to the newsstand just beyond the woman formerly known as Seligson, where a skinny blond girl my age walked her fingers along a row of glossy magazines. She wore a tie- dyed tank top stretched over a chest that wasnt so skinny, and jeans that were more hole than denim, billowing out from her bare legs as if a big wind were blowing through them, somehow, in that airless terminal. Rhonda ne Seligson looked over her shoulder and then stood up suddenly, excusing herself.
Thats Rhondas girl, Jodi, my mother said. Shes going on the teen tour too.
Rhonda yanked a magazine out of Jodis hands and stuck it in the wrong place on the rack.
I didnt know for sure then, but I pretty much figured this Jodi came with an i. What I imagined saying at that mument was, Jodis going on the teen tour too. I imagined jutting my crotch out a bit when I said it, a move that was more Elvis than Madonna. Or maybe I thought of all that later. Regardless, I wasnt going to do anything of the sort. What I actually said was, Jodis a babe.
Michelle! my mother scolded, freeing one arm to point at me over the mini-television. Women dont say things like that.
Like most of my mothers pronouncements at the time, this struck me as both very true and oddly unimportant. But the real truth was that even before shed complained, Id felt myself backing down, as if I needed to offer an explanation. I mean, shes lucky, shes really thin.
But her mother turned out zaftig, my father contributed.
I see Shlomo! my mother exclaimed, struggling out of her seat.


Shlomo was our guide, a fact Id learned from the literature my parents had handed me in a blue-and-white envelope, the tangible evidence of my Hanukkah present. My mother had known someone related to Shlomo, an aunt or something, at her synagogue when she was growing up. I hadnt met him yet. He  was  in  his twen- ties, scruffy in his short beard and hiking boots. A  pair of  girl-  ish leather sandals dangled from the straps of his carry-onthe footwear he would don when we got off the plane in Tel Aviv and would continue to wear until he saw us back to JFK again. He in- troduced himself and instructed us to say our good-byes; we had to get through security.
I got a window seat, jammed in next to an Orthodox rabbi and  his wife who didnt seem to want anything to do with me. I dont know why I was surprised to hear the usual announcements not  just in English, but in Hebrew as wellmaybe because this Hebrew sounded nothing like the slow, methodical language recited by the American teachers at my school. I didnt understand one  word  of  it. It wasnt until after takeoff that I realized there were two kids from the tour seated right behind me: Jodi and some boy who had a crocheted Yankees yarmulke attached to his head with a bobby pin. I didnt see much of them; I just heard them talking. Their conver- sation primarily concerned Shlomo, whod started circulating in the aisles as soon as the seat-belt sign was off, just sort of nodding hello to his charges where they were scattered about the aircraft. He was apparently in transitional footwear mode; hed unlaced his boots and was padding around in socks.
Whats with his name? Shlomo? This was Jodi. It sounds like  a clown or a pet ferret or something. Or a word my grandparents would use for penis.
It did sound like a dirty Yiddish word, though I knew it was Hebrew for Solomon, and I figured the boy with the yarmulke knew it too, but he wasnt sharing that particular insight. He just giggled at the word penis. It occurred to me, then, that there was an amazing coincidence going on, what with Shlomo and Jodi and alland I felt a sudden urge to get up on my knees in my seat, lean over the head- rest, and tell Jodi Lowenthal all about it. But as Ive said, I wasnt


totally stupid. I didnt do anything. I put my headphones onthey were sort of tubular back then, the kind that just brought the sound up in rubber tunnels, one for each ear. If you wanted, you could skip the earphones, sit on the floor, and put your ear to the armrest, and youd hear the same thing youd hear with the contraption on. The music on the El Al channels was definitely not Madonna. I pretty much slept through the entire flight, and for most of the bus ride from Ben Gurion to Jerusalem, which was our home base. The bro- chure called it our birthright city. It said going there would  feel like coming home. Wed been on the road for nearly an hour when Shlomo woke everyone up with the buss built-in P.A. system and made us pile out at a misty overlook. The wind was strong and there was a light horizontal rain, though everything in the distance still looked parched.
Shlomo led the group to a cluster of stone benches, shouting  Keep up the end, keep up the end!a suggestion clearly intended for Jodi, who lagged slightly behind everyone else, her ripped jeans ballooning when she turned into the wind. She shuffled up and im- mediately sat down, hugging her bare shoulders. I could hear her muttering.
Fuck, its cold. Isnt Israel supposed to be a desert?
Shlomo introduced us to Jerusalem: the new city with its glossy, modern white buildings to the west, the Old City with its greasy- looking white walls to the east. Even the hills were different shades of dusty white. Shlomos arm jumped around as he talked about one mount and then another. He taught us an Israeli army trick: when you want to point out a faraway spot to your buddies, you determine its relative distance from other faraway spots with a unit of measure called fingers. He demonstrated this with a small Arab village that squatted in a dry valley, holding up his hand and counting three fingers to the village from the Old Citys sealed Messiah Gate. I held up three fingers of my own, but when I set them against my view of the gate, my hand didnt reach the village, ending instead at a small Arab girl riding a clumsy donkey down a winding path. The animal was a whitish gray, the girl covered in dust, and I hadnt noticed the two until I focused on my hand. I inched my arm over to the right


so I could reach the village Shlomo wanted us to see. The girl was  obliterated behind my fingers.
Behind me on the bench, the boy from the plane had seated himself next to Jodi again. Apparently he had offered her the warmth of his coat, if she was willing to cuddle up under his arm while he contin- ued to wear it. Jodi was willing. The boys skullcap rose periodically from his head, flapping in the breeze. This boy, I later learned, was one of the most religious in our group. He refused to light a match  on the Sabbath due to the rabbinical prohibition against fire, but would smoke pot on that day if someone else got the joint started.   In the days that followed, the boys of the teen tour would seat them- selves next to Jodi, shuffle with her behind the others, press their thumbs into her back for a quick massage, and offer her the warmth of their coats while Shlomo pointed out hills of dirt and walls of stone. I wasnt sure how much of Israel my traveling companions actually noticed. But I wasnt sure how much of it I was getting, either: Jerusalem, where we spent the first week, was nothing like  Id imagined, though I gathered that was because we hadnt been to the Old City yet. Thered been a fatal stabbing of a Yeshiva student near the Temple Mount just before wed arrived, and Shlomo said wed have to wait to visit that part of town; we  would  be  taken to the Western Wall as a very special finale. The new city, the only place we were allowed to explore, seemed to me full of shabby gloom, its downtown streets lined with squat, dark storefronts featuring the kind of merchandise Id seen in the most forsaken parts of North Jersey, decrepit housewares and dusty books and bewildered-looking mannequins lost in indeterminate fashion eras. Each morning, our bus would trundle out of the city center to open, manicured, chalky- white spaces where wed visit the Holocaust museum or the Knesset or the Great Synagogue or the miniature model of ancient Jerusalem at the Holy Land Hotel, and then, when visiting hours were over, we were trundled back to the center and set looseto mingle, presum- ably, with our Israeli counterparts, noisy, aggressive, lively kids who spewed the impenetrable language Id heard on the airplane, who passed us on the shopping strips or sat one table over in a slightly-off- looking pizza joint, accustomed, it seemed, to a presence like ours,


and therefore oblivious to it. I tagged along as the kids from the bus searched for something to do, something to recognize; when theyd given up on that, the girls turned their sights on something to buy, the boys on someone to torment. Theyd lead us into the McDa- vidsoddly decorated in red, white, and blueand complain to the management that the ketchup was seasoned incorrectly or attempt, repeatedly, to order a bacon double cheeseburger. Or, when wed crowded into a corner falafel stand, where the old men behind the counter handed us heaping portions in soft, warm bread pockets, the boys would shout Coke? Coke? and the men, responding Coca Cola, yes, would head for the refrigerator until the boys appeared to change their minds, yelling Pepsi? Pepsi?knowing quite well that there was no Pepsi to be found here, since Pepsi, wed been told, had chosen to maintain its vast Arab market by shunning the tiny Israeli one. When the falafel men hesitated, uncertain how to respond, the boys would ramp it up: Dr. Pepper? Mountain Dew? Orange Shasta? Mello Yello? Fizzy Jism? until the old men, clean-shaven and brown in their faces, swift and guttural in their speech, nothing like our German and Russian grandfathers, finally gave up, flustered.
At night, we stayed in youth-hostel rooms, girls on one hall, boys
on another. I was always first in bed, the bottom of a corner bunk.  Id pull the blanket up past my nose, nearly but not completely cover- ing my eyes, so that I could feel my lashes against the top sheet when I blinked. I was an only child, and had never slept in a room with anyone else before, as far as I could recall. I wasnt in the habit of looking at people in those days, either, at least not when they could look back at me, so this method of hiding myself behind the covers had freed me up, without my actually intending it, to take a nightly inventory of my roommates. No one paid me any notice, but even then I avoided faces, scanning instead from the necks down: round bodies with heavy breasts that filled extra-large Benetton T-shirts doubling as pajamas, tall bodies stretched taut and thin over sturdy frames, with long, muscular legs that reminded me of frogs splayed out on dissecting pans. Nothing I could find on myself was either as pronounced or as defined. My own hand searched in vain for the hip bones I saw protruding beneath exposed skin when someone reached


up to grab the ladder to an upper bunk. I could not see, when I at-  tempted to consider myself in that mix, what it was that supposedly made us all alike; all I saw, when I peered out from under the starched and stamped youth-hostel bedding, was what I was certain I did not have in common with the rest of them, what I was supposed to  be but felt certain I was not, something soft but burgeoning, something gleefully awakenedto what, I hadnt a clue. Each night the girls primped for bed as if sleeping were a party, until Shlomo popped his head in, never bothering to knock, and declared wed reached The We-Bitching Houra term he used nightly, to no ones particular amusement, or, I suspect, comprehension, except that it meant lights out. Most nights, hed use the opportunity to usher Jodi through the door from wherever hed found her. Shed plop into her bottom bunk just as the room went dark.
I was fully aware of the fact that my parents were hoping that, in ad- dition to connecting with the homeland, Id come back from the tour with new friendswith any friends, actually, since my loss column had pretty much overtaken the gains in the friendship department from the start of high school. It seemed theyd decided to blame it   on the fact that my options were limited to my small private school, to our little cul-de-sac community. Theyd already made me try all kinds of clubs, stuff for smart kids, stuff for artists, stuff that tried to turn what you did in your room at home into who you were. Id tried a whole lot of things, but then I finally refused to try anymore. I didnt really belong to anything. Once Id overheard my father, when he thought I was asleep in my room, tell my mother he was worried because everyone else my age seemed to have a thing. I knew what he was talking about: He always said my generation needed a thing  if they wanted to get into a good college, have a good career. My mother laughed and said, Oh, one of these days shell fall in love, and then shell find her thing soon enough. Sometimes I felt like she was speaking a dead language. Still, I harbored a constant, nagging sense that I owed my parents something, so I didnt complain about the Israel trip. And I was, I suppose, kind of curious, if you could call it that. Israel was so far away, so very old; I figured something really different couldnt hurt. Once I was there, it struck me as kind of cute


that their good intentions were so pathetically misplaced, consider- ing how the kids on the teen tour were exactly the same as the ones at homeonly amplified, what with the whirlwind intensity of our Israel adventure. But in retrospect, I understood that my mum and dad werent really willing to grant me a true change of scenery. They wanted desperately for me to find my place anywhere in the world, in any little community, as long as it was just like theirs at home.
About a week into the tour, we were told to pack for a few days excursion: we were going to mock-military boot camp. This was a place Israeli high-school students went for an entire week, to prepare for the real thingarmy servicewhen they graduated. For us, the youth of the Diaspora, they offered the three-day version. Id known from the brochure that they were going to give us guns. Not for keeps, of course, just for a session on a shooting range, and a few en- counters before that, for the sake of getting acquainted. We arrived at night, in another light rain, and were greeted by uniformed soldiers, who, barking at us in accented English, made us line up right outside the bus and stand at attention, our bags on the damp ground beside us. We were separatednot just for sleeping this timeinto platoons of boys and girls, but the soldiers bossing us around were all female, which everyone took as a pretty clear sign of how phony the whole boot camp thing was. After some shouting and leering and warnings about how hard wed work for the next few days, they gave us each a little stack of army-green shirts and pants and sent us off to our bar- racks, which looked just like another youth hostel.
I was brushing my teeth in the dorm-style bathroom, jockeying for position at the sink, when Jodi marched in, taking the stall just behind me. A mument later she screamed.
Goddammit! Does anyone out there have any corks?
I hesitated, looking at the other girls, who busied themselves at the sinks. In my memory, their faces are clouded in the water-damaged mirror; I cant remember their names, except for the fact that no one else was a Jodi. None of them showed any indication of having heard Jodis distress call. I thought of a few things I might say, didnt say any of them, and then decided to say something after all.
Wait a second! Ill be right there! I ran back to the room, wiping


the foaming toothpaste from my lips with my T-shirt. I was back in a flash, tossing a Ziploc full of tampons over the bathroom stall with the full mumentum of my run.
Holy Jesus, you rock!
I heard her tear open a tampon behind the stall door. I rinsed my mouth and started to introduce myself, raising my voice above the flushing toilets. I wanted to be sure she knew who her supplier was.
I know who you are, she said, coming out of the stall. My mother told me at the airport. Your mum was Uncle Dannys swim- suit girl. Michelle, right?
I said, Its Misha. I stepped aside from my place at the sink so she could wash her hands. She wore her hair in a ponytail with an elasticized piece of flannel that matched her flannel boxer shorts. Her legs had remained perfectly smooth since JFK. She looked up at me, not directly, but in the mirror. I looked away, at myself. It felt stupid. I didnt know what else to say.
Decent nickname, she said. She picked at something tiny on her chin. Then she shuffled off to our room. The lights were out by the time I felt my way to bed.
The girl soldiers were all corporals, a rank they said was called Rabat in Hebrew, which sounded a whole lot like Rabbi to me. Which made the subtle differences between bat mitzvah tutoring and faux boot  camp all the more  apparent.  For  two days, we  labored  in our single-sex squadrons, cleaning bathrooms, peeling vegetables, lumbering through obstacle courses, learning not to light a match while on night patrol, all the stuff, they said, the Israel Defense Forces were supposed to do. We also studied the guns, and handled them a bitM16s, a pretty serious-looking rifle that we disassembled and cleaned, with oil and handkerchiefs, right on the mess hall tables. The thing soldiers seemed to do most, though, was stand at atten- tion, and the girls corporal, Rabat Osnat, liked to line us up and shout at us a whole lot. I noticed she had a stronger accent than the restyou couldnt tell if she was trying to say we should get over the wall or the war, if she thought we were hungry or angry. On the morning of the third day, the day when wed fire our weapons, we endured an especially long and unintelligible lecture. We were all


standing stiffly, arms behind our backs and faces straight ahead, when someone broke ranks and headed toward the latrineI didnt need to turn my head to know it was Jodi, but I shifted a little anyway, just so I could see what would happen next. Rabat Osnat demanded an explanation, and Jodi spun around. I could see the tie-dye peeking out at the neckline of her fatigues. Her shirt was unbuttoned at the bottom and tied into a knot at her midriff, and her pants were cuffed tightly around her calves, creating her signature ballooning about the knees. An elaborate system of safety pins sparkled at the pant cuffs, just above her thick pink socks and mud-stained K-Swiss.
Im on the rag, sister. I dont suppose you stop the real war for that, but the Fisher-Price version can sure as hell wait.
I wasnt sure theyd let Jodi fire a gun after that, and in fact, when they lined us up at the range, each of us standing at the edge of an army-issue blanket on which an M16 sat alongside giant, airfield- style earmuffs, I didnt see Jodi. But then there she  was, person-  ally escorted by Rabat Osnat to an unoccupied blanket not far from mine. I figured shed pointed out to Shlomo, who was there some- where at the camp, slapping around in his sandals, that her mum had paid the big bucks to let her shoot guns in Israel, and Shlomo had convinced the soldiers in charge to let her stay. Wed been briefed a hundred times, it seemed, on shooting-range protocol: there was a command for waiting, a command for lying on our stomachs by the gunwhich had been propped for us on a stand at the blankets far edgea command to load the cartridge, another for placing the blue plastic muffs on our ears and lifting the butt of the gun so it rested against our shoulders, one to take the trigger off the safety setting (and move it to semiautomatic, not automatic), and a command to fire. There were targets across the waynot in the shape of people  or anything, just black concentric circles on a white sheet of paper. We werent even supposed to hit the middle; we just had to try to get the five bullets we fired to hit somewhere close to each other. I wasnt really sure what that was all aboutwerent you supposed to hit the right enemy in the right place the first time? But I wasnt in a think- ing mood: after we were reminded, for the umpteenth time, never to lift the guns from their stands, we got the signal to hit the floor. With


my face close to the ground and the headset over my ears, I could  smell the blankets musty scent, but the rest of the world seemed far away. I looked down the row of would-be shooters and saw Jodi, her ponytail high on her head, her jaw working its way around a wad of gum, her painted nails splayed out before herjust some chick in front of a pile of Seventeen magazines. The corporals must have saved their best shouting for the range, because their voices were the only clear sounds coming through the mufflers. The command came to release the safety, and I saw one of Jodis hot pink fingernails slide into the trigger. I continued to see it even when I turned to my own target and fired five times. I saw nothing up ahead; I felt nothing but a shove in my shoulder with each shot.
Once we were done, which seemed about as soon as wed begun, we rested our guns in their stands, pulled off the headsets, and awaited one final command to smile as the Rabats came around for our cameras, preserving the mument on film. I had my old plastic Kodak with me, the one my parents had given me for my bat mitz- vah, filled with the same roll of 126 Id cranked into it  at  the start  of the trip. Rabat Osnat took her best shotthe snap  of  the shut-  ter sounded small but sharp after everything elseand then placed the camera on the blanket beside me. I sat up and fumbled with it, trying to advance the reel, realizing my hands were sweating. Osnat was making her way down the row, and I watched her wrestle for a while with a complicated-looking 35mm gadget that belonged to the girl next to me. Ahead, Jodi was still prone on her blanket, headgear hugging her blond head. She made eye contact and paused her gum- chewing to smile a toothy grin; her hand formed a thumbs-up beside her face, which she tilted toward the butt of the M16. I realized she was posing for me, and I brought the Kodak to my eye and snapped. She winked and stuck her tongue out a little, letting it hover over   the rifle, like she was just about to give it a good lick. I snapped again. She wriggled on the blanket, propping herself on one elbow and using her free hand to make a move on the gun that looked something like the Wicked Witch of the Westyou know, when shes going after her crystal ball, poppies, poppies a kind of air-caress that then reached under the barrel, almost cupping it, and before I could


snap again I saw Rabat Osnat yank Jodis hand back right through my viewfinder. Then another set of hands snatched my camera.
Somehow I was implicated in this affair, as if Id encouraged Jodi with my camerawork, as if my little plastic box was as likely to burn my handor fire a spare bulletas Jodis rifle. For our punishment, we were to be excluded from a weekend trip down south to the beach, left instead with a host family back in chilly Jerusalem. The tour bus actually dropped us off on the way out of town, taking a winding road that hugged the Old City walls, the closest wed come to them so far. They were massive, the stones much larger than theyd seemed from the overlook, and neatly landscaped with grass and space-age-looking spotlights. We turned up a hillthe city was all hillsand stopped in front of a public bus stop, with people therean old woman with  a bulging plastic bag at her feet and a long-haired man with a baby  in a stroller. I was sitting up front, just behind Shlomo, hugging my overnight bag, but he made cheerful use of the loudspeaker to let usme and Jodiknow that this was our stop. I didnt turn around to watch Jodi make her way to the exit from her usual spot in the way back; I just bounded down the steps after Shlomo, nearly tripping over the guy with his stroller. His name was David, and he was a friend of Shlomos, and he would be our host. Nobody said anything to the old lady; I figured she was just waiting for her bus. When Jodi caught up, the tour bus took Shlomo and the rest of the kids into the Judean Desert and toward the Red Sea, while we followed the guy with the baby home.
I thought we were going to stay with an Israeli family, but David
and his wife were just Americans who had been living in Israel for a while, sort of religious hippies with matching long brown hair; when Shoshanna got home, my first thought was that the two of them looked like brother and sister. It was still a few hours until the sun set and Sabbath began, but they put us to work right away, washing the white tile floors with a squeegee and pushing the dirty water down   a drain in the balcony, chopping vegetables for chicken soup. Jodi wasnt too talkative, and I couldnt think of anything interesting to say, so I just listened while they told the story of how theyd fallen in love with Jerusalem and with each other all at once, and while they


fed afternoon snacks of soup veggies to their little boy, Bentzi, the ap- parent result of all that falling in love. When they finally sent us into the dining room to set the table, I passed Jodi a stack of plates and whispered Faux-faux-boot-camp, and she let out a  little chuckle. At dinner they sang but didnt make us sing; they drank wine but didnt make us not drink. No drinking age in Israel, Shoshanna said, pouring us each a new glass. Bentzi mashed soup carrots into   a Sesame Street book I recognized from when I was a kid. He held    it out to me with an oily hand. Grover is a goy, he said. It cracked his parents up.
Over dessert, they invited us to Sabbath morning services at some kind of do-it-yourself synagoguea whole group of religious hip- pies like themselvesthat met in the bomb shelter of a neighbor-  ing apartment building. I wondered if the wine had loosened up my facial muscles, since David could tell I was pretty alarmed by that last detail, the bomb shelter. He said it was a normal thing in Israel, that there was one in the basement of every building. Mostly kids used them, he said, to have parties or make out. All of a sudden Jodi had something to say.
Thanks for the suggestion and all, but Misha and I are going to the real synagogue down the street.
I had no idea what Jodi was up to, since I was pretty sure she wasnt planning to attend any Sabbath services, but I nodded anyway. It was the first time anyone ever called me Misha. In any event, they didnt seem to care, David and Shoshanna, where we did our praying. They were clearly all about freedom of expression. David scooped up the baby, probably to go wash the soup off, and Shoshanna showed us to the little room in the back of the apartment where we were sup- posed to sleep. Id assumed it would be Bentzis room, full of Sesame Street paraphernalia and a crib and a couple of sleeping bags for us, but this room had nothing in it but a wall of built-in cabinets and one full-sized bed. Jodi was apparently done saying everything she was going to say to our hosts for the night, since she dumped her bag on the floor by the cabinets, pulled a bunch of junk out, and disappeared into the bathroom. I was feeling a little woozy, so when Shoshanna left me there, I just sat on the edge of the bed for a while, facing the


wall unit, looking at all the different-sized brown laminate rectangles with their matching handles, wondering which actually had hanging closets behind them and which had shelves and which were drawers, and when Jodi got back in her tank top and flannel boxers, her bare legs still looking like they never needed to be shaved, she stood and stared at me for a minute, combing her fingers through her hair to wrangle it into a ponytail, and said, Whats the matter with you?
I wasnt really sure how to answer that, so I just sat there for an- other minute, which forced Jodi to choose the side of the bed away from the cabinets. I could feel her making little tugs on the blanket, trying to yank it out from under my butt, so I finally stood up and turned around, and as she got under the covers, she looked right at me and laughed, which made me feel even more disoriented, as if Id never actually seen her before, and now I would have to fall asleep beside her. She said it again, Whats the matter? Then she said, Theyre just making us share the covers. No one asked you to get into my haunted house or anything.
When she said it like that, I really did feel frightened for a mument like when youre a little kid and the mere mention of a haunted house gives you the creeps, dread and excitement all at once. But I wasnt that terribly horribly stupid. I knew Jodi was talking about her Jodi, so I laughed right back, and went to brush my teeth and get into my sweats. By the time I turned out the light and climbed into bed she had her face to the wall. Shed used something for her skinlike Sea Breeze, that mouthwash-blue stuff my mother would never let me tryand the smell hovered over the bed, all cool and scrubbed-clean. I turned my back to her and faced the complicated wardrobe. It was probably the first time Id ever had bed spins. I could feel the edge of the mattress underneath me, all along my length, my body balanced as far out as it could go without falling off. I felt like I would fall anyway, forward or backward, it didnt matterI was sure it would be a long way down, to some place at the bottom I knew perfectly well but still couldnt see. Or maybe I didnt think exactly that, not right then. Maybe I thought about all of that later.  Im  not  sure  how long Id been in bed, spinning, when I felt Jodi shift under the covers. The blankets lifted a littleI remember a mument of coolness


beneath them, as if for a second, I was suspended in air, in contact with nothingand then Jodi was there, pressed against me, a warm body and breath on my neck and back. I could feel her breasts, one nestled just below each of my shoulder blades. Her bare knees fit against the backs of my own, through my sweatpants. I didnt know where shed put her armnot the one beneath her, which I could feel vaguely on my back as well, but the one on top, that was free to move where she liked; it did not wrap around my front, or even rest on my shoulder. I imagined shed laid it along her side, her hand resting on her hip, or maybe it was folded in at the elbow, coming back up to touch her own shoulder. I wasnt sure how shed managed to balance that way. I didnt dare look. The warmth of her made her visible to me, though, and a thought occurred to me unlike any other Id had before: to feel a person pressed against you in darkness was to see that person as if in a full, radiating light. I saw her, not as she was in the airport terminal or the firing range or the back of the bus, not even as her particular assemblage of parts that bore a resemblance to one girls torso, anothers calves. It was a different kind of vision, one that I could feel on and in myself, with perfect clarity, perfect recognition. It was with that sort of intensity that I felt Jodi lock herself into me, and remain there. I was conscious for a long while of not breathing, so I wasnt sure how it was, exactly, that I was still alive. I was more than awake. When I was little, my mother used to say you couldnt fall asleep until you believed you were going to fall asleep, and so I grew to accept myself as the heretic I was always meant to be, a child insomniac of insufficient faith. As Jodi lay there, unmoving but still progressingthe steady pressure of her body an advance further and further into mineI was more the heretic than ever. I knew I would not sleep a wink. Yet what I knew turned out to be  wrong: some- how that condition of complete wakefulness, of illumination, slid me seamlessly into a soft darkness, and into sleep.
When I opened my eyes the room was bright. Jodi was no longer
at my back, though I  could feel  the tension  in the blanket where  she lay claim to her half of it, somewhere behind me still. I hadnt stirred an inch from where Id placed myself, face to the wardrobe, the night before.  I  lay  there and waited.  Soon I  could hear Bentzis


babbling, an original mixture of English and Hebrew. Then there was the low murmur of his parents voices in the hall, the jingling of keys. The front door had barely clicked shut when I felt Jodi rise; I automatically brought the covers to my lashes. Jodi crouched on the floor beside the wardrobe and riffled through her bag, yanking out an extra-large mens shirt that she pulled over her head. It fell past her tank top, hitting low on her thighs. She tugged the boxer shorts down from underneath the shirt and stepped  out  of  them, pulling  a pair of leggings up instead. She carefully smoothed her ponytail, repositioning it to one side of her head. Then she stepped into her K- Swiss, faced the bed squarely, put her hands on her hips, and looked right at me. It hadnt occurred to me that she could see my eyes. Her voice contained the usual impatient mocking.
You ready yet?
I remember thinking, Maybe, yes, wait, for what?
Were going to the Old City, she said. I can totally find my way.
I watched from the bus.
What about David and them? I was having trouble speaking properly. I lowered the blanket to just below my chin. Wont they see us from services? They said their synagogue was next door.
Its in a bomb shelter, genius. Im pretty sure those things dont have windows.
When I grabbed my clothes and headed for the bathroom, I thought I heard Jodis chuckle follow me out of the room, but I couldnt be sure; I dont think I was really sure of anything that morning, except that Jodi had replaced Shlomo as my tour guide, and I was allowing her to lead me into the surprisingly clear day, out of the neighborhood where wed slept and onto unfamiliar streets, shady, long blocks of office buildings marked ministry of one thing or another, all closed up and quiet, abandoned for the Sabbath holi- day. Jodi blazed our trail without hesitation, though it seemed to take us an awfully long time to retrace the path the bus had taken the day before. We walked silently for a long while, until we reached the sunny end of a road that opened out onto the Old City walls.  This wasnt the same spot wed passed the day before: there were no trimmed lawns, no evenly spaced spotlights. The streets were full


of grit and trash, the sidewalks erratically paved, as if thered been an idea of work that was later forgotten. The plaza between us and the grand gate aheada dark, pointed arch between two thick, ara- besque towersdescended into the archway in wide stone steps cov- ered by boxes of goods for sale and the vendors who squatted beside them. We both paused, taking in the sudden chaos, and then Jodi plunged into the throng. I followed quickly now, directing my feet around ground-level spreads of salt and pepper shakers, childrens underwear, flashlights, wind-up toys in shrink-wrap, pocketknives. Women shoppers, dark scarves encircling their heads, stooped over cardboard flats crammed with live chicks. We made our way through the crowd and into the gateway, a deep chamber inside the city wall. The gate did not deposit us  immediately,  as  Id  expected, into the familiar, white open; instead, the crowd thickened and our pace slowed as we moved into deeper darkness.  As my  eyes adjusted I saw the shops: hardware stores, money changers, produce stands, all tucked into the dank corners that routed us along a sharply angular path, preventing direct access to the city. We had entered a living arm of the Arab market. I found myself unable to direct my own movement, squeezed as I was into the mass of people moving in both directions, somehow, through the gate. An old woman with a leafy branch of figs tied around her in a sling pressed her knuckles into my back, urging me forward, and I tried to oblige, eager to keep up with Jodis sideways ponytail. At last I stumbled out of the arch and into an alleywaythere was only slightly more sunlight here, slightly more airwhere I hurried to Jodis side. Storekeepers sat on low stools on a slim margin of pavement and stared. Some cooked meat on small grills or sipped tea in tiny shot-sized glasses, tossing dice over backgammon sets. Music blared from many radiosstring instruments that played in dizzying, descending scales, an accompa-
niment to wailing voices, Arabic words.
Cool, Jodi said. Hold still a minute. She rested a hand on my shoulder. I stood perfectly still, just as shed said, while she lifted one foot to pull a pebble from the bottom of her sneaker. The shoe had barely reached the ground before she continued onward, up an in- cline, the alley rising on broadly spaced concrete steps that made my


gait feel clumsy, halting, as I continued to follow. A boy navigated a cart of sesame breads downhill, riding a tire loosely attached to the carts rear, bouncing lightly off each low step. There was something solemn about the marketit was just shopping, of course, almost the same junk you could buy at a second-rate mall back home, but there was something weighty here, like the people took it all very seri- ously. It was a deliberate mix of Times Square and supermarket and city park and someones cousins backyard. There were alleyways with flashing string lights and boom boxes for sale and posters of painted, dark-haired, zaftig ladies  who  must  have  been  someones  idea  of a movie star, and there were alleyways hung entirely with massive pieces of meat, some cut and skinned, some freshly killed; there were rows of stalls with keffiyehs and olivewood crosses, and there were neatly swept aisles with glass-enclosed storefronts, womens fashions draped elegantly inside. We had turned up another incline when a boy gave a shout; he rode his bread cart much faster than the one before him, and Jodi and I separated, making room for him to pass. As I backed out of his path I felt my head touch some sort of display and turned around to find a dozen hanging mirrors, my blank face swaying gently in each of them. They were framed in black cloth em- broidered in deep reds and purples, a pouch of fragrance fitted in on top. Jodi moved to my side of the alley and, parting the mirror-vines, stepped up to the shop window and cupped her hands over her face to peer inside. I stepped up with her: it was an embroidery shop, the entire space piled high with loose fabrics, dresses, bags, all decorated in the same ornate patterns of the mirrors. As Jodi looked, one of her hands left her face and moved again to my shoulder; then it slid down my sleeve, pulling me with her as she swung open the shops door and brought us both inside.
The room was filled with the fragrance of the mirrors and with a
placid quiet, as if wed traveled far from the noise of the marketplace just outside. An Arab manbalding, roundsat on a mound of car- pets with two tall blond womenGerman tourists, I thought, from their light coloring and emphatic speechand fanned a  sampling of fabrics out between them. He kept an eye on us as he spoke to them in his own accented English. Jodi didnt seem to notice; she


dropped my arm and ran her hand along the hanging fabrics, unfold- ing blouses from their stacks and spreading them out against herself, stirring scarves in overflowing baskets. She chose a dress on a hanger and handed it to me.
Herehold this up to see if it fits, she said, spreading her arms out before me, as if submitting to be frisked. I held the dress out, awkwardly, a gown for a paper doll. It dragged a little on the rug. Pull it up so the collar reaches my neck, silly, she said, and I obeyed, pushing it closer to her body, grazing her nose a little with the hang- ers tip. She laughed, just as she had the night before, so I just stood there and kept the dress aloft while she lifted her arms farther to unzip it a bit at the back and extract the wire hanger, which she tossed on a nearby stack. She wrapped the dress more closely around her, smoothing it against her chest, her hips. Hold it there for a sec, she whispered, and my ears pricked at the softness, the confidence in her tones. I felt a little off balance again, so I inched my feet nearer, steadying myself as I pressed the dress to the places shed shown me. Jodi wasnt looking at the dress anymoreinstead her eyes met mine, broadcasting a bewildering glint of determination. Which is why it took me a mument to realize that shed brought her hands behind her, reaching for two fistfuls of  scarves from a  basket just within reach. I stood there, still holding the dress up high, while she slipped the scarves into the pockets of her blouse, shot a look across the room, and stepped out from behind the curtain Id created for her, heading for the door. With my back to the shopkeeper, I didnt see him rise, but I heard his shout, a kind of Wullah! that sent Jodi right out the door and back down the alley wed just climbed. I pulled that dress back toward me then, and just kept hugging it to my own self while the storekeeper rushed past me and out the door, shouting more now, rousing two young men lounging in a doorway across the alley. They took off in Jodis directionI couldnt see her ponytail anymore, though I couldnt see much from where I was glued to the carpet. The German women brushed past me next, slowly, staring, and dis- appeared out the door as the shopkeeper returned.
To  me  he  said,  Sit,  pointing  to  the  pile  of  rugs. He  took  the
dress from my  hands and I  sat.  He  spun around to search the piles


behind him until he found the hanger, forcing it back into the dress as he spoke.
The Israeli bolice, he said, pronouncing it Is-ra-el-i, each syllable distinct. He hung the dress in its place and paced the room. I call the Israeli bolice. Your barentsthey are at your hotel? They do not know you are here?
No, I said. My parents dont know.
The policeman came, in blue and white, though wed waited so long, I couldnt imagine hed have any luck  finding Jodi. He spot- ted me right away where I sat on the carpets in the back, but didnt acknowledge me beyond that first glance, speaking instead to the shopkeeper in a steady monotoneHebrew or Arabic, I couldnt tell. A few women in headscarves stood outside the shop window, cup- ping their faces as Jodi had done, staring inside, at me, I figured. My eyes traced the patterns of embroidery everywhere in the room. The perfume felt heavier than before, the store a cavern within a cave. I retraced our steps in my mind, trying to remember when wed last been fully outdoors, in the sunlight, under an open sky. I wasnt sure. At last I heard a stirring in the small crowd at the window, and the door opened: there was Jodi, hesitating at the entrance, someone holding the door for hera soldier, a boy soldier, fresh-faced, like the more palatable boys at my school, a rifle slung over his shoulder. He stood there, waiting, holding the door open wide, peering about as if hed brought Jodi in to do some shopping, wanted to make sure theyd found the right place. As Jodi stepped over the threshold she lifted a gentle hand to his arm, the one with the gun, then let go. She stayed there by the front, her arms crossed, her look indignant. I didnt see any scarves. I imagined them cast off somewhere in the ancient citybright flecks of color against black, wedged into a crack in massive white stone. It was only when the soldier followed Jodi inside that I saw that with his free hand he gripped the arm of an Arab man only slightly older than himselfI recognized him as one of the young men who had chased Jodi down the alley. The soldier tugged at the Arab, then pushed him into the store in a way that struck me not as rough, but decisive, older than his years. They let the glass door swing shut behind them and again we were enclosed


in silence. The young Arab did not move, did not look to anyone; the soldier resumed his grip. Something about the pair made we want to recede into the embroidery, but I did the opposite: I stood. We all stood there, Jodi and the soldier and the young Arab man and the older man and the policeman and me.
The policeman spoke first, to the soldierin Hebrew, I was sure, because I heard the word freicha, one of the slang words Shlomo had taught us, a word that meant bimbo. The soldier listened, looking in one mument hardened, in another confused, shifting his gaze between Jodi and the man still in his custody. Maybe because I couldnt understand what it was they were saying, my eyes felt free to wander to everyones faces, taking in the look of hesitation in the soldier, and the mute fury in the young man, and the exasperation in the older man, and the fatigue in the policeman, and, in Jodi, the cruelty and the beauty and the fear. Id felt something, finally, in this bizarre gathering, something strong and undeniable, a commitment at lasta breaking away. I had stepped up, joined in, and though no one paid me any mind, I knew Id soon find my voice and speak, confess everything, an offering of clarification and exoneration and responsibility that would mean absolutely nothing, not just because it would change nothing, fix nothing, but because it would not include the truth, the one Id understood right thenand later as well, for sure, for every day afterward, but also, I remember perfectly, right then in that mument, when I began at last to separate in earnest, irrevocably, from everything, relinquishing everything I was supposed to be and everything I was not, turning, at last, far away from everyone, as I would always, infinitely, from then on. I remember that mument better than any other, because it was the one in which I fell, as my mother had predicted, in lovepermanently, devastatinglywith my own distance, the thing I finally understood would be my rightful salvation, my rightful ruin.

Ken took dialysis Tuesdays and Thursdays. It fell to Tommy after his mum passed to check his stepdad out of the Pine Lodge Correctional Facility. Drop him at the hospital. Take him back three hours later.
Ken groaned as he climbed up the truck. Whatcha got there, Tom?
Tommy looked over the backseat. Pole and tackle.
You goin fishin this weekend?
I aint skydivin.
Ken stared out his window. You stop me by a store?
There was a downtown grocery sold Lotto, fortified wines, and forties. Ken hopped out. Tommy spun radio stations till Ken come back with a can a corn.
Oh, no you aint, Ken.
So got-damn tired, Tom. Cant sit on that blood machine today.
Youd rather die?
Id rather fish.
No way, Ken.
He drove toward Sacred Heart. But when Tommy stopped at a red light Ken reached back, got the pole and jumped out. Fine, Tommy thought. Die. I dont care. The old man walked toward the Spokane River. Tommy pulled up next to him, reached over and rolled down the passenger window.

94	Jess Walter

Get in the damn truck, Ken. Ken ignored him.
That pole aint even geared. Ken walked, facing away.
Tommy drove alongside for another block. Get in the  truck, Ken.
Ken turned down a one-way. Tommy couldnt follow.
Fine. Stupid bastard. Tommy went back to work, but the only thing in the pit was a brake job on some old ladys Mercury: four hundred in repairs on a shit-bucket worth three. Pissed, Tommy gave the Mercury to Todd and drove back downtown.
He parked, got his tackle box from the truck and walked back along the river. Found his stepfather under a bridge, dry pole next   to him.
Tommy gave him hook and weight. Kens gray fingers shook.
Give it here. Tommy weighted and hooked the line. He pulled   a can opener from the tackle box and opened Kens corn. Carefully, Tommy pushed the steel hook into the corns paper skin until, with a tiny spurt, it gave way.
He handed the old man back the pole. Ken cast it.
Half-hour later, Ken reeled in a dull catfish, yellow-eyed and spiny.
No fight in the thing at all. Almost like it didnt mind.
Ken held it up. Well I will be got-damned. Tommy released the fish. It just kind of sank.
He dropped the old man at the front gate of the prison, his breath- ing already shallow. Rusty. He was so weak Tommy had to reach over and pop his door.
Hey that wadnt a bad got-damn fish. All things considered. His eyes were filming over already. We should go again Tuesday.
We gonna start playin catch now, too? Tommy asked. Ken laughed. I doubt it.
Then Tommy watched the dying old man pass through the metal gate. The fucker.

I push my fingers into the dark green fabric, smooth the starched jacket out over the back of the kitchen chair. Through the front windows the wind kicks red sand up into the paloverde bushes. My fingers trace the stitched letters on the front of the jacket: John Mc- carty U.S. Border Patrol. Outside the sunlight is  a  pale  milky version of its angry summer self, but it grows hotter every day. Johns footsteps pound in the hall. I press my nails deeper into the gold let- ters of his name.
Layna, he booms in his preacher voice, what are you doing, honey?
My shoulders stiffen before his hands even reach me.
John lets out a mouthful of air. Give me my jacket, Layna.  I dont lift my hands.
What are you doing? he asks again. Laying hands on it? Trying to curse me?
Laying on hands is for healing, I say, lifting my fingers and stick- ing them into my apron pocket.
He rests his right hand heavy on the base of my neck and grabs the jacket. He smells of mint toothpaste, Old Spice, and hair gel. I breathe deep, smell for something more. I found a bottle in his truck the other day, an almost empty liter of mezcal with a pale worm bob- bing at the bottom. In the glove box, beside the mezcal, lay a silver


bracelet and pink hair clip. I didnt ask him about them. He would have told me some illegal alien left them, told me he forgot to throw them away.
John lifts his hand, guiding his arms into the stiff sleeves of his jacket. Layna honey, he says, you worry yourself too much.
The linoleum under my  bare feet  is  gritty with sand.  Its  time  to mop again, fourth time in one week. That devil sand wont stay outside. At night it opens the door, slips in, and settles itself into the seams of my furniture, the eyes of my child.
From the cabinet I pull out a bag of yesterdays biscuits, take two, and place them inside the mouth of the microwave. Behind me, John fixes his belt. I wrap the warmed biscuits in tinfoil, set them beside Johns thermos, and busy myself with the few dishes left from last nights dinner.
John grabs the thermos. Thanks, he says and walks toward the front door, leaving the biscuits sitting on the counter.
He turns his pickup around in the dirt yard and maneuvers out between the prickly amargosa, driving past the rusting Oldsmobile parked under the cottonwood tree. He brought it out here a few months ago and fixed it up pretty good. Taught me how to drive stick shift in the evenings after work, bouncing the old boat over the sand hills until the sun got too low and the coyotes came out.
I set the last dish in the rack and open the tinfoil package of bis- cuits. They are dry and Im not hungry. If only we had a dog to give scraps to. One of our dogs got killed by javelinas three months back and John shot the other one to save him from the same fate. He said a gun is better protection than a dog any day. He took me out into the dry creek bed and taught me to shoot the .22 he keeps  in the  hall closet. For a mument things felt like they did when we first got together, before His Beautiful Blood Holiness Church told us they didnt want John to be their preacher anymore, before we moved halfway across the United States. He held his hand over mine and gripped the gun just like hed traced my fingers along the pages of Job and Exodus back in Tennessee. But when I tried to kiss him he ducked his head away.
On the front stoop, transplanted prickly pear clippings and night- blooming cereus sit in cut-open milk jugs. I grab my watering can


from behind the rocking chair and fill it at the side of the house. The first few months out here my transplanted pansies and mums shriv- eled to a crisp. I took to looking at a desert plant book from a shop   in Arivaca. I grew what I could.
The perimeter of the yard is outlined in amargosa, creosote, and ocotillo. Fat red buds nest among the crucifixion thorns of the amar- gosa at the end of the driveway. Just past the bush, a chaos of foot- prints spill across the shifting dust of the road. The footprints run all together, one over another like a cattle trail. Illegals. We live out here for just this reason. Johns boss owns the house but never comes out. He used it for a hunting cabin of sorts but then he started finding evidence of the aliens staying here. Aliens were sleeping in it, coming across the border in droves and holing up before making the last trek to Arivaca. He lets us stay for practically no rent, just to keep the il- legals off his land. Only they dont stay off. At night their shadow footsteps surround the house. Most of the time theyre out in fields beyond the mesquites but sometimes they come right up in the yard. Theyve got babies with them and old folks sometimes. John sleeps with his 9 mm on the bedside table.
My eyes search the clumps of buckbrush for movement. They mostly go by at night, but it worries me some. One time, an illegal came up out of the bushes once and grabbed my leg as I unloaded groceries from the truck. He was old, his skin like the leather of a baseball glove, his small eyes sunken into his skull. He spoke words like the devil whispering in the trees, and saliva dripped from the corner of his mouth. John said he probably hadnt had water in two or three days, said the rest of his group probably left him. John took him on into Arivaca to the border patrol office.
The sun sears the skin along the back of my neck. I pick up my watering can and head back inside to check on my baby. Nathans six years old, but hes special. Advanced Muscular Dystrophy is the medi- cal term, but John told me when he was born that it meant we were blessed, for the meek shall inherit the earth.
Nathan lies in his crib and stares at the ceiling where a water leak made a tree pattern. I flip the switch, toggle it up and down a few times, but the light wont come on.
Hey buddy, I call to him, hang on a second.


In the kitchen the clock on the coffeemaker does not glow and the overhead light will not turn on. John must have forgot to pay the bill. We dont get mail out here so he pays the bills when he goes through town. I cross the kitchen and pick up the phone, listen to the steady rhythm of the dial tone for a minute before deciding not to call. John hates for me to phone him at work, says its embarrassing, says every- body elses wife seems to get along fine without calling in grocery lists every day. Our stove runs off propane and weve got a bunch of candles and one of those old-timey lamps in the closet somewhere. John can pay up tomorrow.
Nathan lies on his side, face pushed up against the wooden rails of his crib. I lift him up, kiss his cheek, and carry him to the changing table. His body is so small and immobile, like the delicate shells the cicadas leave behind.
The amargosas gonna bloom real soon, I whisper, today maybe.
He blinks. My finger traces his lips. Nathan rarely smiles.
We spend the morning at the kitchen table. Nathan sits strapped into his high chair with a plastic bib around his neck while I guide tiny spoons of applesauce into his mouth. With the electricity out and all, I plan to go for an easy dinner. Cornbread and beans and wieners, maybe. I wonder if our moneys run low. John never talks about money but he works long hours and we hardly spend anything living out here.
I wipe Nathans face, pull a small baseball cap down onto his silky head, and carry him out front to the amargosa bush. The blood petals are packed in tiny fists among the thorns. Nathan coos. Among the roots of the bush two big ants struggle to carry the body of a third. We sit and watch the funeral procession play out across the miniature sand dunes.
The sun is too strong, so I carry Nathan inside. Lay him down in his crib and lay myself on the couch. I should sweep and mop the floor, should go look for that oil lamp. But I dont like the sound of  all the quiet, the way the wind rakes the branches across the tin roof and taps at the windows, so I plug my ears, close my eyes.

The sun has passed the tops of the cottonwoods and mesquites. With


the electricity out theres no way to tell time, but it seems like it must be past five. John will be home in an hour. I visualize the ingredients for dinner mixing and preparing themselves.
Nathan sits in his chair with his teddy bears and watches me cook. By the time the sun sets out the western windows, John is still not home. By May the sun never sets before seven-thirty. Johns usually home by six. I light candles in the windows and call the office in Arivaca, but Agent Malone says John left work early, took off some- time around four. I hang up the phone and press my forehead against the wall. My mind goes to the mezcal, the silver bracelet and pretty hair clip in Johns truck, the dark shadow images of the woman who might have worn them. My belly moves like it did during my preg- nancy with Nathan. I push the vague thread of thoughts away and tell myself he left early to go get groceries and pay the overdue bill, then the truck broke down and hes out there working on it, on his way home soon.
After Nathan goes to sleep, I get the .22 out of the hall closet and lay on the couch, the gun beside me and my eyes trained on the front door. The sand slips inside and coyotes bark from the bluff out back. Our house is a small vessel in a shuddering sea of darkness and wind and voices I cant quite make out.

Nathans whimpers wake me. My muscles ache and my fingers strug- gle to unclench their grip on the .22. I stumble into the kitchen, wiping my eyes, and lift the phone to my ear. No dial tone. Only empty air. My gut twists. Nathan burbles  from the other  room  but  I cant go to him. Panic questions fill my mind and Nathan doesnt have any answers. I look out the window toward the Oldsmobile.
The day is hot already. The sky is blinding blue and the metal car door burning to the touch. I duck into the seat, push  the key  into the ignition, and turn it. The car coughs and whines, trying faintly to turn over. I pull the key out and take a deep breath, fit  it  back into the ignition and turn again. This time there is no noise at  all.  A wave of fear leaps up in me, swells my tongue, and wets my eyes. My mind skips to John and I dont even know what lies to tell myself about him now. I lean back in the seat, push the sweaty hair off my forehead, close my eyes and picture the cool green of the creek at my


Grandpapas house back in Tennessee, the creek that ran down to  the well-house where you could lift the cedar bucket, bring the cold metal ladle to your lips and drink long swallows with your toes spread out across the slippery rocks of the well house floor. White hot light sears my skin through the glass. I get out of the car, leave the door hanging open and the key in the ignition.

I sit on the couch and watch the shadow of a mesquite tree jump across the kitchen wall. My eyes follow the line out to the tree and beyond into the endless landscape. Just where the brown sand meets the brilliant blue something moves, a flicker of a coyote or a dog or an illegal. The more my eyes focus on it the more it disappears.

Nathan whines again from the bedroom so I set his breakfast out on the table and go to fetch him. When its just me and Nathan at home, my mind wanders. The doctor said its good to  engage  him a  lot,  but after running through the list of songs and patty-cake games my mind just wanders. Mostly it doesnt seem to bother Nathan; hes an old soul and he understands me. But sometimes the silence out here gets so loud. I wish like hell he could talk. With the electricity off, there isnt even the radio to listen to. The Gospel Hour out of Tucson usually comes on at noon. Its especially for housewives, runs from twelve to two. Theyve got good songs on there, spirited enough to make you want to get up and mop the floor.

We stay at the table long after Nathan is done eating. He smears the applesauce across his cheeks and into his hair. Out the front window a jackrabbit leaps, then freezes. A vulture hangs motionless amidst the puffs of clouds. The sun inches along its course across the horizon and Nathan falls asleep in his high chair, head resting on his shoul- der. I go to move him, to wipe his face and carry him into his crib, but my arms are too heavy to lift. The stripes of sunlight on the wall above the stove move and change color. Must be past two. Gospel Hour would be over. On a normal day I would turn the radio off and run a bucket full of suds to mop the kitchen floor. I can almost see myself doing it. Mopping and drying, pulling potatoes out of the bin and chicken breasts out of the freezer.


*	*	*
The bedroom closet is a jigsaw puzzle of cardboard boxes and suit- cases. I pull open five containers before finding the lamp. On my way out I pass the bedside table and stop. Johns 9 mm is gone and his wedding ring lies in its place.
My throat constricts. I turn on my heel, cross the room, and jerk the top bureau drawer open. My eyes search for the gold gleam of Johns granddaddys pocket watch, but there is only a nest of hand- kerchiefs with a small coil of money inside. Three twenty-dollar bills curled in a circle like a snake. I let myself go, dropping down onto the floor. The bureau drawer forms a roof above my head. I try to concentrate but my mind keeps bouncing, keeps mixing up images of silver bracelets and pink hair clips and the twenty-five miles of sand and chaparral that separate me from civilization.
Nathan moans. My fingers press flat against the floorboards till my knuckles turn white.
On the third day a river forms, spreading out from the Deepfreeze and into the hall. I pull up the lid, stare for a mument at the mound of thawing chicken, hamburger, ribs, and pork butt, then snap the top closed. Out the window the amargosa bush shakes in the wind, its blood blossoms spread wide open.
Nathan is already awake, so I lift him from his bed and bring him outside in his pajamas. The bush trembles with the faint fluttering motion of hundreds of small brown moths. Ignoring the growing heat, they hover and descend among the clusters of red petals and yellow stamens. We sit down in the buckbrush and watch the quiv- ering amargosa while the sun burns strong and stretches shadows across the sand.
When Nathan pants and sweat drips down his forehead, we head inside. I set him on the kitchen floor with two stuffed bears for com- pany and turn the oven on. We cook all through the afternoon and as I lift the last burger out of the frying pan the sun dips behind the amargosa. A rush of deep orange through tangled blossoms.
Nathan is busy devouring his teddy bear.
You hungry, buddy? I ask him, pointing to the towering stack of meat. Nathan cant eat meat. He cant chew good enough.
The kitchen grows thick with shadows. I pull the glass dome off the


oil lamp and twist the wick up. Oily smoke curls into the darkening air. Theres not a whole lot of fuel in it, but itll do for a while. The room smells rich with meat, but the thought of eating makes me sick.
Well, we wont go hungry, I say to Nathan.
The lamp on the windowsill turns the glass into a funhouse mirror, reflecting and distorting my sunburnt face. Over the regular pattern of night noises, the rhythm of crickets and katydids, comes the soft yet undeniable sound of footsteps and the whimper cry of a baby. I reach for the lamp, ready to extinguish it. But the silence of the house has grown so heavy that these strange human rustlings dont scare me like they once did.
A knock sounds out sharp against the wood of the front door. There is a pause and then the sound comes again over the back- ground of shuffling feet and whispering voices. I gather Nathan and his bear up into my arms and cross to the front door. The metal knob is cold in my palm as I open it.
A man stares up at me with dark diamond eyes. His right hand is raised, ready for another knock. Behind him crowd five others. An older woman, three teenage boys and a mother with a baby tied to her back. They look worn out and used up. Theyve become a part    of the desert, shifting sand people. Fear darts across their faces like a bird in a house.
The man says something, and his words come out all jumbled up and unintelligible. I squeeze Nathan. The mans words mean noth- ing to me and he has not taken a step back; in fact he leans his stocky body forward into the frame of the door, nearly touching my elbow. There is a form like the curve of a pistol butt below his cotton T-shirt, tucked into the waistband of his pants. He says the words again, raises his right hand in a drinking motion, and lifts an empty milk jug up toward my face.
Oh . . . water, I say, you all need water.
My relief at the simplicity of their request is so complete that I turn quickly toward the kitchen, leaving the door open. The man enters with me and my stomach flips but I keep walking. The others follow us inside, each carrying an empty milk jug.
In the kitchen the smell of the meat hits me full in the face. If they


need water they are probably starving too. John has told me how they lose their way sometimes, wander for days with no food or water. I set Nathan in his high chair and point to the kitchen sink. They line up quietly. The first man fills his jug halfway and then steps aside and empties it down his throat in vicious audible gulps. The baby begins to fuss and the mother passes her jug to the older woman and shifts the child from her back to her chest. No one breathes a word but their eyes jump to the plate of meat on the counter.
Do you all wanna eat? I point to the platter.
The man who knocked looks up at me and mumbles more foreign words. I pull a stack of plates down out of the cupboard and set them beside the food.
Go on, I say, eat.
And the Mexicans eat, right there at my kitchen table. The mother shifts her baby from her chest to her back, tightening the blanket in a knot between her breasts. I wonder if I could carry Nathan that way. Hes bigger but he doesnt weigh much. While the Mexicans eat, I go to the hall closet, pull a sheet out and tear it down the middle with my teeth. Hold the larger half up to my body and drape it  around my shoulder. I cant let the only humans Ive seen in three days go and leave me alone again. If we walk at night the sun wont hurt Nathan. The more of us there are, the less the coyotes and javelinas will bother us. We cant walk twenty-five miles in one night, but there must be shade someplace where we can wait the day out. I have no plan beyond arriving in Arivaca. The full fear of waiting out here alone blooms open in my chest and leaves me breathless.
The kitchen is full of the clang of forks and strange voices. I fill   an empty gallon jug for myself, wrap the rest of the meat in tinfoil, and put it in a grocery bag. The  head  man stands and the others  rise with him. There is no way to tell them that I am coming along. The mother is last in line. She turns and smiles at me and I hold up the ripped sheet, point to Nathan and then back toward myself. She wrinkles up her nose with laughter but helps me all the same. She bends me over and sets Nathan on my back. His knobby knees fit on either side of my spine, curled up just like when he was inside me. The mother pulls the sheet tight across my chest and laughs once more


then waves good-bye. Shaking my head, I look back at the kitchen  table filled with scattered dishes. My mind glances lightly over John, wondering if he will recant and come back looking. A part of me itches to leave his three twenty-dollar bills there on the table. But Im not stupid; well need food and bus tickets. I blow out the lantern and the room goes dark as a river at night.
Outside, the sky is so full of stars there is hardly any space be- tween them. The milk jug pulls painfully at my fingers. The weight of Nathan presses down on my shoulder blade and my mind goes to the ants under the amargosa, struggling across the sand.
The Mexicans form a line behind the man and I step in place at the end after the mother. She looks back over her shoulder and wrinkles her forehead. She says something to the woman in front of her who sends the message up the line. When the man in front hears, he steps out, putting his hand up to halt us all. He walks back toward me, shouting. His words are jumbled up but his intention is clear. Hes     a short man, comes only to my nose, but he is strong and angry like some enraged animal, all muscle and shout. My heart leaps inside my ribs but I do not step back. I will not stay out here alone.
The mans teeth flash in the moonlight as he bellows and points toward the house. My eyes glance away across the yard to the shadow shape of the amargosa, filled now with more moths, white ones and dark ones, swarming so that the blossoms are almost invisible. His breath feels hot on my neck. He sounds like he is speaking in tongues the way they did at the revivals back in Tennessee. My fingers grip tight to the milk jug and I pretend it is the Lords words he is bur- bling and not the Devils. The man kicks sand at me. I move closer   to the mother. He spits at my feet but turns then and marches back to the front of the line. The mother glances over her shoulder and  her mouth twists into a tiny smile. My feet fit into the tracks of the six who walk before me. I follow them through the dark and my eyes trace their soft shapes against all that desert and all that sky.

At Luxors airport, Patty panics about corrupt taxi drivers until she sees a man holding a Thomas Cook sign with her name. Tufts of black chest hair poke out from his thin dress shirt. The right amount: manly but not apelike. She greets him with a simple sabah instead of the full hissing/gargling of sabah el-kheir, a sound that must be similar to a snake choking on a sock.
He shakes her hand like a Westerner instead of kissing her cheek like an Egyptian. I am Hossam. Nice to meet you, Batty. Just like the seminarians, unable to say Ps. He leads her to his white Peugeot in his flat leather sandals, the type that dont give support or protection. Patty heads for the back of Hossams car, but he says, Sit up front.
Keep me company.
She doesnt have to keep playing the part of consecrated virgin,   as the seminarians called her. During her two months of teaching English at the Coptic Catholic seminary, she kept her divorce and former married status tucked away. But she is in Luxor now, on vaca- tion after all, eager to play the part of tourist, and a tourist wouldnt know better.
Patty moves to unroll her window, but no knob. The heat begins in her head and then flows over her chest. She dabs the sweat off with a bandana. Forty-five and already suffering from menopause. The end of her marriage and reproductive life happened the same


summer. Patty eyes the air-conditioning switch and then, miracu- lously, Hossam turns it on. Her first car in Egypt with working air- conditioning and a driver willing to use it; the rest swear it makes them sick.
Hossam says, You are a good woman, I can tell. She asks how.
He says, Your clothes are respectful.
You can hardly tell that from clothes. Pattys tank top clings to her stomach, hidden beneath her long-sleeved cotton top, part of her conservative clothing arsenal.
He raises an eyebrow. You are not good?
Oh, Im good. And she laughs at how ludicrous she sounds. Her sexual experience is limited to one man before her marriage, an un- fortunate effect of her Catholic upbringing and inability to have sex without attachment. Those two men in her past work out to one man every thirteen adult years.
Hossam glances at the ring on her left hand. You have husband? Patty explains that she wears it to keep men from bothering her. Sexual harassment has no age restrictions in Egypt, and the attention both thrills and disgusts her. Her real wedding ring is tucked in her underwear drawer at her house in San Diego. When she returns, her ex-husband will still be living in a downtown loft with the Brazilian, who is about to pop out his spawn. He probably married her by now,
but Patty stopped reading his emails weeks ago. You are very pretty not to be married.
Patty scans Hossams wrist, no cross tattoo. She asks, Are you Muslim?
We all believe in Abrahams God.
At least his religion accepts divorce. She admits, My husband left me. She feels lighter sharing that information. The seminarians and priests would have asked too many questions that require complex answers, not simple parsed-out English.
Hossam asks, Any children?
Patty shakes her head and rests a hand against her flat stomach. You dont want children?
Of course I do, but my husband didnt.
Husband bad man. Against will of God to deny children. Pur-


pose of marriage is children. Hossam gives her a grazing look, un- usual for an Egyptian man introduced to a woman. Patty likes it. He says, You must have married young. My mother married when she was fifteen.
Something like that. Patty believed that within her first year of marriage she would have a child like her mother did. Patty wanted three, a good number. She keeps mum about the new phase in her life. She hasnt told her mother and sisters yet, unwilling to feel like  a failure now that the fires of menopause have scorched her eggs and left behind a barren desert. Patty should have at least had a daughter, some companionship insurance. She could have been in college by now. An art major, or some sort of degree that would cause Patty to worry that her daughter wouldnt be able to find a job, but would  help with traveling. She would know different dynasties, art periods, and symbolism. She might even fall in love with a handsome young Egyptian man and become fluent in Arabic.
To steer the conversation away from her, Patty asks, Do you have children?
A boy. Fever kill him. Then wife leave.
Asif, Patty trips over her answer and adds, asif gedan. But Egyptians dont say sorry when hearing bad news. They say some- thing about God and praying, like most Egyptian sayings, whether the person is Christian or Muslim. Patty learned a curse that trans- lates to may God destroy your house.
Hossam says, Insha Allah will give me pretty, good wife again. Im sure He will.
Along the road is a Mubarak billboard, the thirteenth one that Patty has seen. Outdated pictures of him in a wide-lapel suit and sideburns are planted all over Egypt. Patty has a set of photographs of herself standing beneath Mubarak billboards, but after a month the novelty turned into an annoyance. She resents the all-seeing, judging Mubarak clinging to his youthful image and power. Twenty-seven years under emergency rule should be enough for anyone.
Hossam asks, You like Luxor? Its beautiful.
Cruise ships with names like Nile Goddess and Alexander the Great


crowd the rivers banks. Westerners and Egyptians walk along the Niles elegant corniche. For this one week, Patty wants to shed her layers and join the other Western women in their sundresses and shorts. After this trip, Patty will visit her favorite seminarian and his family in his village, where she will redon her conservative clothes and careful behavior, and sleep on another rock-hard mattress and rectangular pillow in another hot room while his family squashes together to make room for her.
Hossam pulls up to the Iberotel. Patty suffered biting ants, beans for breakfast, and no air-conditioning at the seminary. But the Ibero- tels brochure promises a pool that floats on a barge in the Nile, omelet station, soft pillows, and il-hamdu lillah, air-conditioning. Patty visualizes lounging next to the pool, unfortunately in her con- servative, skirted swimming suit, the one she wore to the Red Sea with the seminarians, but better than the alternative of the burqini or wading in full-veiled clothing. Also in Pattys suitcase is a red sun- dress that she brought, just in case.
Cramped shops selling hieroglyphic rulers and evil-eye necklaces flank the hotels skinny marble entrance. The bellboy, an older man with a hunched back, takes her suitcase from the trunk. Patty pulls out her wallet to tip him when a man in a Bob Marley T-shirt asks, Want a  felucca ride? Another man with a  silvery beard suggests  a ride in his buggy and then points to his horse, He is strong and good. A woman wearing mesmerizing green eye shadow descends on Patty and says, Madame should come for sugaring. Its better than waxing, less painful. Makes skin nice and smooth, good for touching. She rubs her forearm as evidence. The hawkers pin Patty next to the Peugeot. She clutches her wallet to her chest. Arabic ex- plodes around her.
Hossam starts yelling, probably bringing shame into itthe magic word to use against all Egyptian men. The people start to disband and Hossam apologizes for their impolite behavior.
A man in a gray galabaiya, a traditional robe that looks like a bland muumuu, walks by and leers, Want an Egyptian husband?
Fil mish mish, Patty replies. She doesnt understand how fil mish mish translates to in your dreams when mish mish is an apricot.


Hossam claps his hands and grins. Ah, you Egyptian woman. Fil mish mish. Very good.
His lips might taste like the salty Mediterranean Sea. Patty imag- ines him as someone ancient, one of St. Marks descendants before St. Augustine infected the Church with his views on sex, before the Catholic Church even existed, a time when most Egyptians were Christians in defiance of Rome. But Hossam is Muslim, part of an- other culture, another conquest. It must be impossible to have a sin- gular identity when your country has been repeatedly conquered. The abrasive desert where Persian armies disappeared in sandstorms kept Egyptians huddled to the one water source that flows south to north, bringing people to Egypt, but rarely out of it. Even Cleopatra was Greek.

First on Pattys list is Hatshepsuts Temple, site of Egypts first female pharaoh, whose reign, like Pattys marriage, lasted for twenty-one years. The sun beats down on the dusty earth. Hossam wears a red baseball cap with an awkwardly stitched NY, as if someone unsure of English letters had created it. His mustache shades his thick lips, unlike her exs spotty facial hair.
Patty gives Hossam four hundred pounds, eighty dollars, and says, For tickets today. She was told to sneak money to her guide, be- cause its shameful for a woman to pay.
Hossam hands her tickets at the entrance and says, I wait. Youre not going with me?
He tsk-tsks her. I driver, not guide. Other sites, yes. But this one is too important.
I thought you were a driver and a guide. No one is a driver and a guide.
Come with me. Ill pay you to be my guide.
They think I take business from guides. They ask for license. Just driver. I study engineering, not tourism.
You went to college?
University. My friend Mahmoud, Hossam waves at another mustached man standing next to another white Peugeot, is a social worker. No jobs in Egypt. Some go to Gulf to work. Hossam hands


her a bottle of water and adds, Be careful. Wear your hat. Take care of your pretty white skin.
Hossam returns to his car, about to become a roasting tin can. The temple is a three-level structure carved out of the base of a limestone cliff, looking 70s modernist in its simplicity. Patty gets on the shut- tle and hands over her ticket that cost twenty-five pfisters, five cents. Everyone has to be paid and tipped, even for distances that would take a ten-minute walk. At the airport, a mans job was to push the button to lift the parking arm.
Patty tries to read her guidebook on the first terrace of the temple, but one of the guards grabs her arm and says, Madame, here. Look here. He lifts up a red rope to let her into a cordoned-off area. She backs away, unwilling to damage thousands of years of history for her own gratification. He sticks his hand out, palm up, and flexes his fingers repeatedly, as if to say, gimmee gimmee.
Guides lead Italian and Spanish tour groups unmolested, but each part of the temple lands Patty into a section of baksheesh-seeking men who are supposed to guard the sites but instead subsidize their measly pay by opening restricted areas. Clusters of guides hang out in the front, but they look shifty. Hossam should have entered the temple with her, even if he would have broken some driver/guide rule. After all, shes paying.
Patty hears a slip of English, blessed English. A short Egyptian guide leads a British man with bursts of red in his hair along the temples lower terrace. Patty lags behind. Her water bottle is danger- ously low. She should have brought a Camelbak like her ex suggested. The guide points out the gaps where Hatshepsuts images and cartouches were chiseled off the temples limestone walls. Many of her statues were torn down and smashed or disfigured before being buried in a pit, and the official history was rewritten without her.
Still, in some places, especially ones outside the line of sight, her image remains.
Patty asks, How could they erase her like that?
The Brit turns around. Quite fantastic, dont you think?
Patty says, If her reign had been filled with wars and economic disaster, they would have left her image up so everyone would re- member a failed female pharaoh.


The guide says, Thats just an opinion, then turns his back to Patty.
The men walk up to the middle terrace. Patty follows. The guide keeps looking back and begins to walk faster. But the Brit stops and asks, Are you here alone?
Patty nods, hoping she doesnt appear too pathetic.
Brave to be wandering here without a guide, especially as a woman.
Or dumb. I hired a driver but not a guide.
I did the opposite. I figured I could walk, but not read my guide- book and fend off these hooligans.
Patty introduces herself and learns the Brits name is Edmond.
The guide points to Edmond and says, I call him Khwaga. Its a better fit. The Egyptian equivalent of gringo.
She asks him, Esmak eh? Proud that she knows how to ask whats your name?
Ashraf. He has the familiar cross tattoo on his wrist. But unlike the seminarians, he doesnt have a mustache.
Patty asks, Are you Coptic Catholic?
Ashraf wags his finger. No no. Coptic Orthodox.
Pope Shenouda declared that a Coptic Orthodox woman would be better off marrying a Muslim man than a Coptic Catholic, the ulti- mate insult. The seminarians complained about the pope betraying his Christian brothers and Patty reminded them they follow the pope in Rome, not the one in Alexandria. Still, rejection from a minority must be humiliating, like wandering around a Middle Eastern coun- try alone as a divorced, childless, barren, middle-aged woman.
Edmond says, Please join us. We wouldnt be gentlemen if we left you alone in the desert fighting off baksheesh-seeking men.
Ashraf stiffens until Patty announces, Ill pay too.
He leads the tour again, slowing down, answering questions, hoping for a larger tip. Ashraf says, Hatshepsut called this place Djeser Djeseru, Splendor of Splendors. It also translates to Holiest of Holies. Splendor and holy can have the same meaning.
Edmond looks at the topless men in kilts carved into the temple wall and says, Back then they knew how to dress in this infernal heat.


Ashraf points to a cow with a sun disc between its horns. The cow smiles coyly, as if it is the original Mona Lisa. He says, The God- dess Hathor symbolizes love, sexuality, and motherhood. Egyptians believe no woman is truly a woman until she has a child.
Pattys body probably reeks of infertility, a smell she imagines as a musty basement. She dabs her forehead. Why does she have to be a cow? Rabbits are known for their fertility.
Edmond says, But cows are mighty. A rabbit goddess could be squashed.
At the center of the middle terrace Ashraf announces, This is where they died.
Who?
His English slips and his tourists sounds like terrorists. Gov- ernment calls it the accident. Ten years ago, terrorists dressed like security and killed sixty-three people. They still remember that day. Ashraf points to men waiting on the cliffs, ready to offer donkey and camel rides to tourists hiking from the Valley of the Kings over to Hatshepsuts Temple.
After Patty mailed the divorce papers and announced her travel plans, her ex sent articles about tourists attacked in Egypt. A mother covered her daughter with her body to protect her, but they both died. Patty imagines being pinned between the pillars as security guards fired into the group of tourists. She almost expects someone to come running down the cliff and end  her  life. What would  her  ex do when he received the news? Would he name his baby after  her? Patty rubs her flat belly, wondering if she had a daughter if she would have sacrificed herself too. Each year she told herself that her ex would change his mind, that all men at some point want to have children, although she believed it a little less each time, especially when he called children small people with needs.
Edmond touches her arm. Dont worry. That was the last major attack here. Just stay out of Sharm el-Sheikh.
Ashraf points behind one of the main temple doors and says, Senenmut designed and built this temple, as well as Luxor and Karnak. Many people believe he was Hatshepsuts lover. He was too low in society to marry her, so he ruled through her bed. In her tomb, men carved sex acts between them. He did great things for Egypt.


Pattys shoulders tense. She didnt need a man. She made herself one. She points to the statues slender arms and rounded breasts, which contrast with the pointy beard. Maybe some of Hatshepsuts powers will seep into Patty through the three-thousand-year-old sandstone. Hatshepsut didnt bear a son, but instead of being rel- egated to a favored second wife after her husbands death, she made herself co-regent for her stepson and took power. She was too busy bringing prosperity to her people to cry over dried up eggs and whether a man wanted her or not.
Patty asks Ashraf if he lives in Luxor.
He frowns. No, no. Cairo. Its a much better city. But Luxor is cleaner than Cairo, and prettier.
Yes, but its boring. Not for tourism, of course. There are many wonderful sights and tourists who love them, but Cairo is for Egyp- tians.
Traffic laws seem to exist in Luxor and there are fewer donkey pull- carts along the road than in Cairo. Trash is properly concealed instead of piled along roads or in massive roadside dumps. The sky looks wider and bluer without high-rises blocking it. So different from Cairos over- loaded city, where iron rods poke out of incomplete concrete buildings, waiting for the next level that wont come, where people live on roofs with goats and no ceilings because its owners are skirting the tax laws. Luxor is a tourist mecca, too important for the government to allow its skyline to be marred with incomplete buildings. The land of the dead attracts plenty of the living.
At the end of their tour, Edmond mentions he is also staying at the Iberotel. Patty asks Ashraf if he is a guest there too. His face darkens. Edmond explains, We cant stay at the same place. The nice hotels worry about prostitution. They see a Western and Egyptian man to- gether, and they assume.
Edmond and Ashraf stand close together, their bodies loose and comfortable. Men hold hands with their male friends in Egypt and kiss their cheeks. Affection within the same sex is allowed in public, and Patty admires that. Still, they look too comfortable. Patty says, But homosexuality is illegal here.
Ashraf wags his finger. You should not use that word. Thats worse than cursing someones mother.


Edmond smiles. Sometimes things are more accessible because theyre taboo. He explains that in Egypt, if a man is the giver, hes not considered homosexual. Some see it as a way for men to satisfy their desires until they can afford to marry, which may take years or never happen. But these poor men have sex drives and good women remain virgins until marriage to maintain their familys honor. Whats a man to do?
Ashraf adds, Our government makes us scrounge from tourists. He glances at Edmond and adds, Too many poor people and too many khawagaat.
Please, I just cut hair.
Edmonds skin is turning pink. He should have worn a hat. Ashraf suggests waiting at a restaurant until the temperature cools, then walking back to the ferry landing where boats take people from the west, the land of the dead, to the east, the land of the living. Patty offers them a ride with her and Hossam.
They walk the gauntlet of aggressive shopkeepers when Hossam appears from one of the stalls with a sealed bottle of relatively cold water. You must drink, he says and hands the bottle to Patty. She gulps it. He gives a polite hello to Edmond and Ashraf, and ma feesh mushkila, no problem, about giving them a ride. Hossam grabs Pat- tys hand and leads her through the shopkeeper onslaught. His hand is surprisingly soft. Most Egyptian husbands and wives dont hold hands or touch each other in public.
She says, Hatshepsut was a smart woman.
She was good leader. Women wise, not snake. Many men think woman has two face, cause of sin and evil in world. They forget woman is the mother, the sister, the friend, source of love and emo- tions.
Hes probably saying it for a larger baksheesh, but its worth it to hear feminist words emerge from an Egyptian mans mouth. Some of the seminarians would say woman is the temptress for men, the reason for original sin. Others seemed too interested in women. One night after dinner, Pattys favorite seminarian invited her on their usual walk. He bought her the requisite drink, a pineapple Fanta, de- spite her preference for water, which he deemed not special enough.


He asked how could he become a celibate priest when he doesnt know what he is giving up, but then stopped and said, Aye, but I forget. You are the consecrated virgin. She almost told him about sex and her ex-husband. Instead, Patty hugged him. His hand grazed the side of her breast. He gave her a suggestive look and she knew  he was hoping she would sleep with him. And she felt gratitude.  This young man, boy really, was twenty years her junior and wanted her. She imagined sneaking him into her room, but hers was situ- ated between the other female teachers; the section the seminarians dubbed the haremlik. She dismissed it as a silly, mumentary thought. Still, she couldnt help but look at the seminarians young bodies and think they were the type of men for hernice and brown with just the right amount of facial hair.
Hossam strokes Pattys index finger. Because of sexuality taboos, Egypt feels a little more romantic. Each glance, each movement, car- ries more meaning and intention.
At the car, Patty heads for the front seat when Ashraf says, No, no. Disreputable women sit in front. Good women sit in back. Its not right to be next to a man unless he is your husband.
Away from the seminary two days and shes already the bad woman in Egypt. She slides into the back. Hossam blasts the air-conditioning. It cools her skin as another rush of heat starts from her head. She mops her forehead with her bandana, hoping the men dont notice.
They cross the bridge to the eastern side and Edmond asks why shes traveling alone. She tells the tired story about her ex-husband. He says, The bastard. She loves his immediate allegiance. She asks how he knows Ashraf. Edmond is a hairdresser who travels to Egypt once a month. He has wealthy oil clients and likes to spend his free time soaking up the sun and sights. Ashraf is the nephew of one of his top clients, and a licensed tour guide. Edmond helps Ashraf with his English and Ashraf helps Edmond make the most of his trips. Life is much cheaper, and more pleasurable, in Luxor than in England.
Patty asks Ashraf, Have you been to England?
I will. No insha Allah. The first Egyptian man she met who doesnt make his future plans dependent on God.
Edmond asks, Any interest in joining forces? My tour guide for


your driver? You can play the part of my wife. We could be downright respectable and have two children at university.
Ashraf says, as if to prove his worth, Luxors name in Arabic is El-Qosor. It means the palaces. The baksheesh she gave him must have been big.
Patty asks Hossam if it would be okay with him. If it makes you happy. Ente mab sota?
Patty agrees, relieved not to be traveling alone. But outside the Iberotel, Hossam watches as Edmond walks inside and asks, Can you trust him? He might have bad ideas. Patty assures Hossam that she is not Edmonds type.
During their second round of drinks at the Iberotels lounge that night, Edmond tells Patty, Well-done with Hossam. I like the gruff, manly type. Patty protests, but Edmond insists, Youre a dream come true for many Egyptian men. Youre well-preserved.
Patty raises her glass. Thanks to power walking and yoga. Hossam could be a possibility. Someone she wouldnt have to see again. She says, He studied engineering. Such a waste that he shut- tles people around.
Its best to focus on the sights.
Are you going to help Ashraf move to England?
Edmond glances at his scotch. I pay him plenty. In a few years hell be able to marry. Thats what they all want.
Before falling asleep that night, Patty prays to Hatshepsut, thank- ing her for the gift of companionship.

The next few days Hossam, Edmond, Patty, and Ashraf take turns playing photographer, memorializing themselves at the various sites of the dead. Each morning Patty gives Hossam money for the day. He buys her water and food, and doesnt give change.
At the Tombs of the Nobles they walk among closed graves, littered with dust and rocks. Squat concrete houses blend into the limestone hillsides above. Hossam searches for someone to open the tombs while Patty,  Edmond, and Ashraf take refuge from the sun under     a storefronts abandoned canopy. Their newest guide insists he lead the tour. He makes a show of pointing out each loose rock and step,


but in the Tomb of Userhat he holds up a jagged mirror to illuminate the artwork with reflected sunlight, just like the ancients did, and temporarily blinds Patty. Hossam steadies her and lectures the man about his carelessness. After that, Ashraf resumes the lead, making a show of correcting the man on time periods. Hossam holds Pattys hand to ensure her safety. In the tomb of Ramose, Hossam looks at the image of swaying mourners and begins to sing, a throaty type of warbling that sounds thousands of years old. Patty leans against him. When their foursome begins to leave a group of boys come run- ning out with trails of postcard collections flapping behind them. Hossam buys Patty two sets. Instead of the standard Egyptian nom bad el dohr, an afternoon nap, Patty, Edmond, Ashraf, and Hossam plunge into the next places on their list. Hossam carries Pattys water and sunblock. His eyes flick over her, watching for signs of amuse- ment or exhaustion, but looks away whenever she dabs her forehead with her bandana. Each day he wears his faded black chinos. Good Egyptian cotton is exported; the dregs are left for its people. Patty
wishes she had a pair of nice linen pants to give him.
In Deir el-Medina, the Workers Village, Hossam walks ahead and advises Patty when to watch her step. He offers his hand for steep descents. Most ancient Egyptians lived on the east side of the Nile, where the sun rises and life begins, but the men who created the royal tombs and artwork in the Valley of the Kings were sentenced to live and die here with their families to keep the tomb locations secret. Every two weeks they received supplies of wheat, beer, onions, dried meat and fish, equal to the price of a bull. In their free time, the workers created their own tombs and artwork, scenes of family life and lovemaking. Hossam holds Pattys hand and says, This is greater than any royal tomb. She squeezes in agreement and stares straight ahead at the scene of a husband and wife in supplication to Nut, the tree goddess, while their bountiful children stand behind them.
Patty takes a picture of a shrub with bright pink flowers. Hossam asks her what is so special. She says, There are flowers growing in the desert.
He kisses her hand. Many things bloom in the desert. Her hand warms beneath his lips.


Ashraf takes her aside and warns, He is a driver and a Muslim. Be careful about encouraging him.
But Patty likes the way Hossam looks at her as if she is special, not a lower-paid second-grade teacher. She spent too many years craning her neck up at her college professor husband, forgetting that at one time they had been equal college students, even forgetting that she supported them while he studied for his masters and then PhD.
At the Colossi of Memnon, Ashraf stays inside the car blasting the air conditioner while Patty, Hossam, and Edmond wander around the gigantic, faceless statues. Edmond jokes about what other type of colossi the statues must have had. A young policeman leans against the giant statues toes and his rifle is slouched across his chest as use- lessly as a beauty pageant sash. Hossam talks to him but keeps watch over Patty. A little girl follows her selling handmade dolls with vacant eyes for five pounds. Hossam buys two for forty pounds. He shoves the scrawny straw dolls into Pattys hand and then grabs her camera. As if on cue, the girl latches on to Pattys  thigh. On  their way out, the young policeman points to a blond European couple kissing. The womans shorts barely cover the tops of her pasty thighs. The police- man asks Patty, Why do Westerners like to make sex in front of us? Each night Patty and Hossam part ways with Edmond and Ashraf.
Hossam hires private feluccas to ride down the black Nile lit by the moon, and to take Patty across to the western side, where the Thebes necropolis waits and where Hossam lives. At the different local res- taurants, Patty feels like he is splurging on her, then remembers the large amount of money she hands him each morning and the change he doesnt give her. Each night ends on the Sheraton hotels rooftop bar, where Hossam drinks at least three beers, odd for a Muslim man. On the fifth night, Hossam takes Patty to Sofra, a restaurant in the backstreets of Luxor. Its filled with foreigners and carved wooden furniture, inlaid with hundreds of iridescent mother-of-pearl pieces. Hossam and Patty sit on the rooftop terrace, the night still heavy with heat from the day. Patty wears her just-in-case red sundress, feel- ing naked without sleeves, but sexy too. Hossam tells her, You look like the goddess Isis. He offers her a  gift: an ankh pendant, a sign of  everlasting life. He  clasps the chain around her  neck. His breath


caresses her shoulders. Patty rubs the ankh, feeling part of something ancient, enjoying the surprise even though she gave him five hundred pounds that morning. He orders their meal and a sheesha, flavored apple. The waiter sets the tall water pipe in front of Hossam, the spiraled glass a delicious ruby red. It feels decadent to smoke before eating, and careless too.
Patty clasps her lips around the reeds plastic end. She sucks in, but nothing happens.
Hossam says, You try too hard. Look like you play flute.
She relaxes and the smoke glides through her mouth and out her nose like a dragon.
Hossam smiles. You pro.
A familiar buzz settles in, reminding her of when she would smoke pot with her ex. Pattys head floats. She asks, What type of engineer- ing did you study?
Electric. Egypts electricity is very bad. I want to help my village, but I do not have government friends or money for baksheesh. But I have a car and license, so driver is good.
Why dont you become a tour guide?
He taps his chest. Too old for school. Too much money. People need drivers.
The candle flickers on the table. She puts her hand on Hossams knee, a bold move, especially in a public setting. His thigh tenses beneath the thin cotton. What I really want to know is, how does mish mish translate to your dreams when it means apricot?
Hossam scoots a little closer. Sweets are important because we have them so little. They are special and rare, like you.
Through the restaurants speakers, a womans throaty voice sings in Arabic. The melody makes Patty feel as if a beautiful mument is happening and ending at the same time.
She says, I love this song, and fixes her eyes on Hossam.
He leans in. This song by Fairuz. Beautiful Lebanese singer. She sings: Visit me once a year, just dont forget me, I fear that love would come in a glimpse and go. His words sound smooth and big for  him, rehearsed even, but, Patty tells herself, sincerity isnt necessary for romance.


Around the room other foreign women breathe in sheesha or eat a decadent meal, some with their boyfriends or husbands, others with Egyptians, but they fade into the dark lighting and it feels like it is just Patty and Hossam.
His hand brushes along her bicep. The hairs on her arms stand on end. He says, First time I saw you, I feel I know you before, from  years ago. You are the moon. The compliment rests on her shoul- ders. To say a woman is the moon means she is the embodiment of perfect beauty and femininity.
Patty recites a silent prayer to Hatshepsut that she doesnt embar- rass herself, then says, If anything happens, it wont mean anything.
He says, I know this. The desert inside her stirs, turning into something lush and filled with splendor.
Patty says, It doesnt mean anything, a couple more times as they walk back to Hossams apartment, a slinky bounce to her step, as if she is wearing high heels instead of flat sandals. She says it once again when she steps inside his concrete walls, bare except for a poster of a red racing car. She says it once again when she sees an inferior Egyptian condom in Hossams hand and wonders why he has one anyway. But, she reminds herself, he is Muslim and he probably hasnt slept with anyone other than his wife and he thinks shes beautiful and this is just a fling.

Patty wants to rest, but Hossams twin bed doesnt have the space or the spring. So few things are soft in Egypt, no wonder people spend most of their time socializing along the Niles corniche, next to the water and away from their concrete homes. At Pattys house in San Diego, and it is her house now thanks to the divorce settlement, she has rooms she forgets to use, a plush sectional, and sheets with a twelve hundred thread count. Her ex declared traveling too much of a hassle and spent their extra savings on a home theater, an outdoor living room with a privacy fence, and a king-sized mattress adjustable on each side  so  that they wouldnt  have  to  agree on  the firmness. A home so comfortable he couldnt feel comfortable anywhere else. The Brazilians loft better be minimalist, with uncomfortable boxy furniture.


Patty calculates a way to return to the Iberotel when Hossam sug- gests they go for a drink. On the Sheratons rooftop, he finishes a whiskey and then announces, Insha Allah, you will marry and have children with me.
Patty laughs, but he stares at her. She thinks of his cheap cotton clothes, his cars window handle without the knob. If she married him, she would have the power.
He leans forward and says, I can give you children. I am a better man than your husband.
Im too old to have children.
No no, not too old. Beautiful woman. How old do you think I am?
Thirty-five. Im forty-five.
His face falls and he looks at her more closely. She asks him how old he is.
Thirty-three. His eyes look yellow and his nose red and lumpy.
He announces, We adopt.
That word has lurked inside Pattys mind since she learned about the Brazilians pregnancy. Hossam probably would be a good father. Her mother and sisters would forgive the Muslim detail for a baby.
Patty states the obvious. Ive known you for five days.
I tell you my hard stories. Now time to share life with me. We can live abroad. Egypt no good. He tells her again about his wife leaving him and his dead daughter. But didnt he say dead son before?
Hossam clutches her hand. Its hard life alone. A woman should have a man take care of her. I can be a good American man.
Patty forces herself to ask, How old is your mother? He looks down at his whiskey. Fifty-three.
Pattys widowed mother often complains that men her age either want a nurse or a purse. Patty looks at Hossams thin sandals and says, I dont want to pay for you.
He protests, but she stands and says, I no longer need your services. She has a shawl in her purse, but she leaves her shoulders bare as she waves down a taxi. A black-and-white one pulls over, the ones no- torious for overcharging. The young driver whistles and begins tell-


ing her how pretty she is. She shames him, asking if he would talk to an Egyptian woman this way. At the Iberotel, she rejects his inflated fare and haggles for a fair rate.

At the front desk, she leaves a message for Edmond that she isnt feeling well. She sleeps late, then spends the rest of the day next to the pool in her skirted black swimming suit, which the seminarians called a bikini, their name for any Western swimwear. The European bikini women lounging around the Iberotel pool would blow their seminarian eyes out. Patty sips pia coladas, margaritas, and every other fruity alcoholic concoction she can think to order from the full Western bar. On their honeymoon, she and her ex stayed at a hotel like this in Hawaii. She was young and firm in her bikini, and was served alcoholic drinks in pineapples. She saw a future for them like the beach, spread out and seemingly infinite.
Her mobile fills with missed calls from Hossam and Edmond. Patty is ordering a banana daiquiri when she spots a leathery, midfifties Italian woman next to a much younger Egyptian man two beach chairs down. He slathers baby oil onto her hardened back. Her skin would fit in at the Khan el-Khalilis leather souq. She turns to him, glistening, but he retreats to his laptop.
Edmond and Ashraf appear next to Pattys lounge chair. Edmond says, Wheres your eye candy? I expected him to be feeding you grapes.
Patty bites into her pineapple slice and imagines Hossam staking out the ferry landing, waiting like a man afraid of missing his last ship out.
Edmond asks, What does he want? Some clothes? Shoes? An apartment? Things are cheap here. Probably not as expensive as you think.
The pineapple lodges in her throat. Marriage. Edmond laughs. Now thats greedy.
Hes thirty-three. Can you believe that?
Its a hard life here. Edmond pats Ashrafs leg. No offense. Thats why you will take me to England. I  must  live  abroad. The leathery Italian cajoles her younger Egyptian cohort with


words like mi amor and per favore. From Hatshepsuts temple to Sofra restaurant, women like her waited in the background, with their dyed hair and fancy sunglasses. Their laughs and smiles were too big, they touched the young mens arms too much, and they leaned in too close, hoping for the same second act men get. Those women Patty chose not to see because she was doing the same thing. Hers and Hossams connection was an illusion, like an oasis in the desert.
Edmond takes Pattys hand. Its time for you to rejoin the living. Ashraf says, Hossam is just a driver. Not important for a good Christian woman like you. He glances at her empty daiquiri glass
and adds, He drinks too much, especially for a Muslim. What about you?
I smoke hubble bubble. Its from nature. A gift from God. Ashraf taps his shirt pocket. Want some hashish?
Edmond says, Brilliant idea.
Ashraf leads them down to the pier and then sits on a rock next to the Nile, tucked against the corniche, out of sight. The granite pokes Pattys rear end as she sucks the hashish in. The police might come, but she could probably mollify them with baksheesh too.
Afterward, Edmond and Ashraf lead her deep into the eastern side of Luxor. The city looks like its floating in a fog. They order at a falafel stand when a burst of trilling interrupts from the opposing sidewalk. People form a protective circle around a groom and his bride in a Western wedding dress. The women welcome the newly- weds with their ululations, that ancient Arabic sound of female joy or grief that reminds Patty of Indians in old Western films.
Ashraf says, Arabic word farah means wedding, but also joy and merriment. We all hope for a wife and children. Someday I will have this, but in a better place, far away.
She admires the newlyweds simple pleasure, happy to be marry- ing one another, not worrying about careers or accomplishments or children. They radiate the youngs innocence and happiness, before love is convoluted with too many needs and wants. Whatever else happened in their story, Patty and her ex had been that way once.
Edmond says, Thank God thats not for us. Can you imagine one person the rest of your life?


He wraps his arm around her waist. She rests her head on his shoulder. If Hatshepsut could return to glory in Egypt after being carved out of history, then Patty can find her way too.
Ashraf and Edmond walk ahead on the high sidewalk, built steep to protect pedestrians from erratic drivers. Patty lunges up to follow and the womens trilling cries of joy trail behind her.

When curious about the depth of a strange river, do you throw in a nearby rock? If so, how long does it normally take you to realize the futility of this supposed gauging? Do you ever? Do you run away instead? Are you someone of the temperament  who  prefers  to  go it alone? Is that the naked truth? Have you ever closed a wound with hot glue? Is it the same moon every night? Will it rain today? If it rained some object other than rain today, would you go out into the streets to celebrate? What if it were raining down lobster claws? Or Olympic gold medals? Or Japanese woodcuts of copulating but- terflies? What would you be willing to go out into the streets to cel- ebrate other than the wet wet rain?
Did you have any allergies that I didnt already know about? Theyre explained as overreactive immune systemswhats akin to firebombing an amateur sniper, or just an amateur whatever with a gun out in the desert looking for asylum in the heavily walled city of your bodydoes this sound true? When did the phrase uncon- ditional surrender migrate into our everyday lexicon? Are most cre- vasses judged too short? Too far? Or just right? Should I sleep with one eye open?
Have you ever witnessed a butterflys first flight? Would you want to? Would you, with me? In silence, exile, and cunning is a nice way to go, no? Would you be honest with me, or would I have to ask

126	Alexander Lumans

you to be honest with me in order for you to be honest with me? Is there a problem here, officer? Are the graves ready?
When you break up with someone, doesnt that phrase summon the image of an Antarctic explorers ship foundering in a sea of pack ice with the frostbite sinking in and the sled dogs baying at the moon and the one football lost in the falling snow?
Are you coming back?
How many meters are we from the nearest bomb shelter? Is that nearer or farther than the nearest white flag?
Was it my piano hands? My large feet? My lazy eye, the one I keep open while sleeping? (Is it not possible that my other eye is simply more alacritous?) Is the truth always naked? Could I dress up the truth so ornately that its no longer said to be truth, dressed in, say,  a kimono or a lobster suit? If such were possible, then the truth is clearly mutable, and therefore no truth at all, and so to change or to come back to old loves is no crime whatsoeverso what about me needs to change? Do you trust shamans?
Why not award gold medals for screaming? Do they even make lobster suits? I imagine that if more celebratory items were made with an eye toward actual proportionate sizes of anatomy, we would have a much more educated populace, is that too much to ask? In a perfect world, would you hot glue claws in place of these feeble little feelers called hands? Alone, can you cook?
Wasnt Ernest Shackleton an amazing fucking person?
Is your idea of a nice afternoon one spent in the company of six- teen hundred butterflies in an artificial rain forest, or does that strike you as a nice afternoon filled with sheer terror, one bound to end in bloodshed? Butterflies taste with their feet, isnt that frightening? Would you, could you, opt for this transference of sense from tongue to toes? Wouldnt the day be filled with mostly the taste of sock and sole? Would you walk into rivers to taste them, rather than to gauge their depth? Or would it be best then to walk on your hands? Drop stones and bombs with your lips?
Are you vexed by sorting recyclables? Do you keep an updated travelogue? A running tab? A bird count? A wallet card listing known allergies? Would you hit a nail with your Stradivarius in order to be

Eight y- six Ways to  Cross One Desert	127

awarded another Stradivarius? Whod take the fight: Shackleton, or Jackie Joyner-Kersee? Is a gate not a gate unless it creaks?
In Goodnight Moon, why does no one say goodnight to the tele- phone?
What is a body pillow, if not a bed? Was poetry once a forte of yours? Is Irish something you only claim to have in you? Did firing your first gun confirm or refute your suspicions concerning the danger of a loaded weapon in the home? When did safety equipment not come with safety labels? Why must we turn the guns safety off? Given a black-and-white photograph, could you tell the difference between the Antarctic tundra and the Saharan desert? If I had a nice
large mirror, would you look into it?
Are you comforted or dispirited by the fact that we no longer live in a time when lazy-eyed trolls under bridges are a daily concern? Will cool ever not be cool? Urns: a treasure? A burden? Or a talk- ing point? If the moon could speak, what wouldnt it say? Are you being honest with me? Honestly, a man like Shackleton would not have survived this lengthy desert crossing. Do you still not trust sha- mans?
What strikes you as the most advantageous to survival: the fear  of bridge trolls, the fear of foundering in pack ice, or the fear of butterflies? If, in an imperfect world, I unknowingly awakened in you an allergic reaction, would you be mad, even though I specifi- cally related to you the analogy of the amateur gunman storming the bodys gates? Is there time for an unconditional surrender before the bombing raids begin? What if I were that sniper, and you the target? If I came dressed not as an amateur or as a gunman, but as a lobster crawling over dunes on my anatomically correct claws, would you be put off or intrigued by a large crustacean crossing the Sahara? If I said, I come in something, exile, and something else, what next? If I said, Im rain, would you drop a rock on me? Or would you come out into the streets to celebrate me falling from the sky?

For every, really, every single thing shed ever done: every movement, mument, choice that had ever really been hers the nights, days, springs, summers, winters, falls, or sorry autumns, all the PG13s and the Xs and the Rs, for every kiss, man, cherry in season, leg spread, sundown, green sunrise, girl, movie, all her friends, every mind-blow, comedown, heartbreak, fever, holiday, her entire child- hood, meeting him, marrying him, the album coming out and seeing their two glossy faces looking sullen and impressive on the cover like anyone in the world would kill to be themit was still so easy to believe that this thing shed just donejust now, fifteen seconds ago, after hed gone to bed, where she looked forward to him going all day every day, pawing across the kitchen, her feet def initely still bleeding, uncorking a bottle of Cave dIrouleguy Gorri dAnsa, which she was so in love with these days, every intention in the world of drinking it all to herself (which she did)was the point, the absolute, what all the rest of it had been leading up to.
Plopping her bony ass down on the swivel chair in front of the desktop she wasnt really supposed to use (because it was his and she broke things), opening up Word and saying a hello that fell through her whole chest to her best friend the picture of the page (well, there


were two pictures of the page, just as there had been two moons (drunk)) and, in her beloved twelve-point Bodoni, so flattering she liked to say, she wrote:
Everyone loves a person who doesnt give a fuck about anything.

She was twenty-eight years old, turning twenty-nine on the thirty- first, and if there was one person in the world who, if you asked anyone who ever met her, would be the last person to ever stop giving a fuck about anything, if they remembered her, they would tell you: Allison Altamont, who was, and once thought she always would be, a person who cared.
Which was exactly what had gotten her into this mess. Shed thought she was really cool for it at the time. Sometimes shed walk to the bookshelf and find that old notebook: red with a bendy binding, a heart on the cover drawn in ballpoint surrounding her initials, Triple- A (her parents were so clever), and inside, closer to the beginning than the end, there they were. Shed written them drunk and alone in her fathers basement five years ago, the night she sold out her commit- ment to never listening to any record past 1972 that anyone said was any good and heard Charlie Caswell by Charlie Caswell:
dandelions and gravel, or black cherry magic markers and black cherry mixed with Coca-Cola Slurpee, and the real serious permanent markers, the toxic kind of headache-inducer, Citrons and crinoline, citron Citrons, standing at the gas station pumping gas into his Pon- tiac  Parisienne.  Biting  down  on  someone  elses  teeth.  Hearing  your alarm clock go off on a TV commercial and the ensuing hit of lethargy LASSITUDE. The words bagel nosh but not anything real about a bagel. Maybe a soft pretzel? Mr. Stupid Peanut and his monocle and all other such mascots who are similarly smug assholes. Glass shards in your bedsheets, sniffing in subzero temperatures, drunk in the middle of the day in either spring or fall but definitely not summer or winter. Prob- ably a Sunday. Beethoven went deaf and thats sad. My ear-worm, my phantom limb. A hot man baking black-and-white cookies at his deli day job and watching The Simpsons on a brown tweed couch in his mothers basement, jerking off and Kleenex roses and chubby basslines tumbling, inaudible through the pink cotton candy lined with pictures of the Pink


Panthers  face  plastered  behind  his  mothers  basements  plaster  walls plastered with posters of the Who. Charlie Caswell alone in terrible un- derwear, hopelessly lighting a lighter on and off with his opposite hand, adjacent to the beer and Coke can graveyard.
Shed never romanticized jerking off before, but on him, it felt right.

That was such a heavy month in her life, the month leading up to  the night she knew shed meet him. It sounds really negative and embarrassing written down, but she basically starved herself all Sep- temberpineapple chunks, almond Snickers, Onion Blossom Prin- gles stacked as high as a roll of quarters, cottage cheese mixed with tropical fruit muesli, apples, baby carrots. She went to the gym every day for thirty-seven days, even fucked up on Dayquil with a head cold and, with every bounce on the elliptical, a brick was lifted from behind her eyes to the top of her skull. She saved up all her money   to buy this really sick Karen Walker minidress, this gray little A-line made out of T-shirt material and covered in all these little ruffles ar- ranged in a shield over the bodice and fanning out like lambs ears  at the shoulders, these fucking gorgeous Rachel Comey pumps in a blue kind of leopard-looking print, thinking up her opening line and rehearsing her opening line and imagining herself saying it, wowing him, like, youd have to actually be the dumbest idiot in the world not to fall for it:
Hi, Im Allison Altamont. We both have alliterative names. When she finally got to say it, he replied, Huh. Huh-huh, wow.
Id never thought about my name being an alliteration before, and she kind of wanted to kill him for a second: How had he never con- sidered that?
Let me buy you a drink, Allison offered, Because youre such a giant fucking genius.
Mmmkay, he sniffed, looking as he was saying it like he was coming to terms with it: his strange new life of stranger-girls offer- ing to buy him drinks for being such a giant fucking genius, which maybe could be something other than all bad.
What do you want?


A beer, he said, Whatevers cheap.
I dont drink beer. I dont know whats cheap. Just  what kind of beer do you want?
A Stella?
Allison laughed. Thats probably the least cheap beer there is.
He didnt look apologetic. He was numb in the face, impossible to see through. Okay, um, a Heineken.
At the bar, Heineken and Stella Artois cost the same, but she went with Heineken, because it was manlier, and she preferred the idea of herself as a Heineken-drinkers girlfriend. Stella made no sense on him, as he wasnt a banker. She would rather die than be a bankers girlfriend.
She realized fast that Charlie was a completely different game than every other man shed had, and once she realized how easy it came, she loved herself for being the person shed suspected she would become once she was with him, grew more confident, twisted and turned herself and him around her, leading.
You must be so lonely, so sad, she said. I dont know. Why?
I dont know, I just think . . . you dont have a band up there.
People in bands, like, always have someone to hang out with. Yeah, he said, I was thinking about getting a drummer. Thats cool, said Allison, I love the drums.
He nodded into the neck of his Heineken. Yeah, I didnt really used to, but Im coming around to them.
Yeah, its really easy to listen to a song and, like, not hear the drums at all. But then if you like listen to a song from the perspective of Im gonna listen to the drums, like, hear them first over everything, it sounds like a completely different song.
This amused him. What are you going to do tonight? After you leave here?
I dont know, she shrugged. Her legs were crossed over his knees. I guess just check the Internet and then like lie in bed and think about how this happened. What about you?
Um. Play piano, I guess.
Are you just gonna, like, make stuff up? she asked, and he chuck-


led, looked at her with a faint awe in his eye and she saw, thought  Thank Godhe wanted to love her.
To him it wasnt make stuff up, it was composition, and though he knew an endearing innocence was not a major one of her selling points, she was stupid about the biggest thing he wasnt, his music, which drove him crazy and hung out at the core of everything he was and he felt lighter with her legs around it.
Yeah, he chuckled, Im just gonna make stuff up.

And so began the phone calls, the late-night phone calls, Charlie having just played a show to a cramped room full of a thousand cool people. They thought he was coolest, but he didnt think he was even cool at all. This all was so confusing for poor Charlie Caswell. This was how it went.
It was so cool to like Charlie Caswell, comparable to when it was cool to like Ariel Pink, or the White Stripes circa White Blood Cells or the Strokes before their first album came out or Odd Future the day after they fucked shit up on Jimmy Fallon. Charlie Caswell and his crazy song lyrics, long song titles, usually sentences, a singing saw on Coco, backmasking the likes of which had not been seen since Revolver. His shiny chocolate pudding bowl of a haircut hanging down over almost all his moony face. From the audience, he was only his chin jutting out like the bottom hammock of a fingernail moon, reminding Allison Altamont of that picture that always came up in childhood: a little boy fishing off the side of the moon, fishing for stars.
And after the phone calls became too much to bear, he flew her out to San Francisco, and together they traveled North up the West Coast in a big brown van, eating carbohydrates remorselessly, kiss- ing so, so delicately in hotel rooms, the tiniest pause of lip pressed up against lip, damp as two dogs noses. Pulling away, that face you make when you love him and your shoulders heave, youve got ques- tion marks in place of pupils, he asking her and she asking him How could you love me? Its always such a surprise.

He didnt ask her to marry him in any cool or interesting way. Actu- ally, he didnt even ask her.


Disillusioned with fame, in what Allison marveled at being the least annoying instance of any rock and roll musician ever being dis- illusioned with fame ever, Charlie decided that he wanted to  move to France: specifically Lyon, a bummy sort of half-city noteworthy mostly for being a major player in the international biotech scene. If Lyon belonged to any other country in the world, it would be a Pitts- burgh. It was so, so like Charlie not to want to move to Paris. When he first said I want to move to France  and Allisonnaturally had asked him Paris? he curled up his lip as if shed asked him Baghdad?
Will you come with me? he asked.
Well, of course Id  love to, but I dont really see how that could  be possible  Im an alien! A foreign alien!
Always so adorable.
My Dads Irish, said Charlie, So I have EU citizenship.
My Dads not Irish, said Allison mournfully. So I dont  have EU citizenship.
Charlie didnt say anything.
I could, like, sham-marry you, said Allison, And, like, bogart off your EU citizenship.
Charlie didnt say anything.
Sorry, said Allison, Bogart off your EU citizenship doesnt really make any real English sense.
Yeah, said Charlie, after an impressively long pause, We could do that.
Id be into doing that, said Allison, dying inside but masking it, I mean, if youd be into doing that.
Sure, said Charlie, Why not?
She wondered what hed think if he knew how hard shed been scheming all along, how scared shed been in the spaces between the schemes shed crafted being pitched and the pitch being received, the scathing heat of every night she convinced herself it wouldnt work this time and it was over. And even though she was the shit- tiest/slowest/least reliable email/text message-responder shed ever met in her entire life, she still felt her entire spine and life collapse when he didnt write her back within four seconds, how hard shed


cried the night she brought up phone sex when he was in Osaka, so the time difference was way off and she couldnt call him, she had no idea, what if he never wrote her back ever ever and shed just ruined it? Over stupid phone sex? Terrorized by pulsatile tinnitus and in- somnia, pressing her thumbs against her earlobes and taking deep breaths to make it stop to no avail, she flicked the lamp on, walked to the computer crying and searched pulsatile tinnitus on Wikipedia. She wanted to understand if excess of fear in ones heart was a key trigger, maybe, but the entry was mostly just a bunch of science and acronyms. At its very bottom, she found a list of Notable Individuals with Tinnitus and it shocked her to see: sandwiched between Peter Brown and Eric Clapton, Charlie Caswell.
What a life, she thought, what a life she led. Wikipedia knows more about my boyfriend than I do.

Fresh from her Farewell Dinnernachos and sangria with her girl- friends, a few of their boyfriends, a  couple  gay  guysshe listened to C.R.E.A.M by Wu-Tang on headphones and contemplated the eternal question: Does cash rule everything around me?
Deep in the dark, dark thicket of Claver meeting Ashtree by the hostel, she crossed paths with a cut, hipstery black guy, the kind of guy she and Eliza once referred to as The Dream. It made her re- member her old life, when whenever she passed a black guy on the street while listening to Wu-Tang or Wu-Tang solo or whatever on headphones, it killed her how he couldnt automatically know it: See that cute white girl at three oclock? Shes listening to fucking Wu- Tang, and shes, like, real about it. And shed always felt so powerless in those muments: if only he could know it, hed fall in love with her that second, he really would, she was sure of it, but what could she do? She couldnt just kill the magic and grab him by the wrist and tell him, Hi! Would you believe that Im listening to Wu-Tang right now? because it would be creepy, and also racist.
But it didnt matter. Her life had answered itself, and there was no longer any need to indulge the dream of a hot hipstery black guy be- cause shed done way better, she didnt have to do that anymore. She was marrying a famous rock star and whenever she wanted to listen


to Wu-Tang or Wu-Tang solo or whatever, he was the only man who mattered, and whether he thought, Thank God for my hot white wife, her love of rap music is so genuine, or What the hell is this racket?, she felt prepared to be cool with it forever.

The first two months were bliss. All Brie and baguettes and Oran- gina and Malbec, so much Orangina and Malbec that Orangina may as well have flowed out of faucets and Malbec from the drinking fountains. Tuna and black olives and hard-boiled egg on baguette: in France, you could get that anywhere. It was like Subway.
After posing for the picture, he told her she could  do  whatever she wanted, so she ran in the mornings, and wrote him a story. She called it Charlie: An Introduction, the concept being the Seymour: An Introduction Buddy Glass never wrote because he kept digress- ing: a descriptive and invasive account of the only subject in the world she really cared to write about: her husbands face. The simile flowed out of her like Orangina from faucets; the obsessive misuse of sanguine spewed like the bottle of Chambord she knocked off their strong kitchen table in January, which inspired her to write the sentence Chambord spewed sanguine, assuming that sanguine meant like blood. She wrote a peach smashed into a newspaper and The Sazerac of Dudes and his Strawberry Fields Forever-ly hazel eyes and his Ibexy shoulders and He looked like a strapping young lad who played running back at Yale in 1917 and Im looking at a faded black- and-white photograph of the whole squad on some Tumblr at noon on a Sunday and there is one particular dude who stands out as being the beauty, and its him.
Shed wanted to marry on New Years Eve; itd been her plan her whole life to marry on New Years Eve. New Years Eve necessar-     ily blows, so if New Years Eve is your wedding anniversary youre granted a free pass out of ever participating in anyones corny New Years Eve celebration againbut Charlie had found the idea of a New Years Eve wedding very corny. They married on December 14, making Valentines Day their two-month anniversary, and on that day Allison climbed into bed with four fried eggs on two croissants and Charlie, folded in half. When she came back from her shower


hed pulled his brow into a knot and shook his head, shook his head, the most frenetic gesture she had ever seen beam from her normally stolid, rocklike man.
Is this what youre gonna do now? he asked, his voice quivering and becoming louder over the course of the sentences delivery like a picture of a cone, getting bigger, Youre just gonna sit around and write about me? You think thats gonna get you a book deal? You think everyones gonna wanna read about me? Charlie Caswell, by his fucking wife ? You think thats what writers do? Sit around, writing about their husbands faces ? Insipid. Insipid, Allison. Write a story. Thats what writers do. Thats the difference between a writer and a fucking . . . teenager.
She nodded at the floor and chewed on the inside of her mouth, walked to the front door still nodding and slipped on a disgusting pair of Toms that belonged to both of them. She walked to the end of the driveway and stood at its very end, kind of pretending or imagin- ing that it was the edge of a cliff. Through the gray-yellow sky, she squinted at the sun, confronting, if only for a mument, the unspeak- able burn of knowingfor sure, nowthat she was the one who was loved less.

Two blasts from the past in quick succession: 1) the twenty-first anni- versary of her mothers death, 2) Eliza at De Gaulle in her Sunday best.
Please, she begged, Please be good.
Be good? Charlie asked, disgusted, Sorry, I didnt realize I was your son. I didnt realize I was a character in the fucking Bible.
Sorry, I dont know what to say to that, said Allison, and made   a big show out of sweeping out the bedroom door the way she imag- ined Carole Lombard, an actress she had never seen act in any movie, would sweep, hitting a scarf over her shoulder like it was the last thing in the world she cared about but it still happened to land per- fectly in a really beautiful scarf way that flattered her chin.
In the cab, she wondered how a life story this romantic could extend to the depths of this godawful. She didnt know how to feel about Eliza coming. Eliza was the only friend from home who had visited her in three years, since all her friends from home were way too


broke and poor to afford a plane ticket. She knew they all thought about how hard they hated their lives, and then they thought of her. She couldnt know whose lives really were worse, hers or theirs.
Shittiness of life is relative, a shitty life is a shitty life no matter what, and every day she woke up in the morning and ate a bowl of oatmeal and drank three cups of black tea and watched movies and didnt eat, ate a handful of baby carrots, pressed her ear to the door of Char- lies studio, listened to a bunch of guitar drone that she worried was garbage, ran for forty-five minutes on the treadmill, did two hun- dred and fifty upper ab crunches and two hundred and fifty lower ab crunches, three sets of twelve reps of bicep curls and overhead extensions, took a shower, blow-dried her hair, straightened her hair, put her hair in a ponytail, figured out dinner with Charlie, ate dinner with Charlie. Sometimes he would try to tell her what hed done that day, and shed purposely antagonize him: Dude, I dont even know what a G even is! Whatever, Ross Gellar! Do I look like a person who reads books from a long time ago?
After dinner, hed return to composing, and Allison would binge- watch entire series of TV shows while crying in bed and eating baby carrots. Charlie went to bed early, and Allison would leave the room, get wasted alone, and Tweet a bunch of bullshit.
She never kissed him, never touched him, barely looked at him. She cried into Elizas big chest at the airport, acting like it was be- cause Oh God! Its been forever! but by the time the cab pulled up to the cottage, the pieces of hair that hung closest to her face were soaked straight through. Shed told Eliza everything, and Eliza, the ferocious best friend, said Lets not even give him the chance to be good.

They changed into pajamas and scrubbed their faces, drank wine and ate fraises confites and pralines a lAncienne with their fingers. Eliza told Allison all the gossip that had happened since Allison moved away. Lily and Jared got married, and theyd had the most embar- rassing wedding:
So, they decided to do, like, this canap wedding? Like, instead of having, like, a sit-down, actual meal, they just had a bunch of cana-


ps. Really stupid canaps. Michelle and I were so drunk. They had these, like, ridiculous fucking, like, crostini
Oh God. Crostini. It doesnt get much tackier than crostini. In this day and age.
Uhyeah. So, yeah, there were these crostini, and, like, some cheese, and tomato jam. Michelle was so fucking drunk, and she kept doing this whole tomato jam shtick she made up, like, Tomato jam ? That doesnt even make any sense! Jam is for strawberries! That was her big line: Jam is for strawberries! It was fucking classic. She got so out of control with it. At one point, the guy came up with the tray and she was just, like, Getitthefuckawayfromme. We were dying.
Allison felt sad. She wished she had been at the wedding, making fun of the wedding, saying Jam is for strawberries with Eliza and Michelle. She would have been so good at Jam is for strawberries! That was her exact sense of humor style.
But anyway, thats not even the point, Eliza continued. The point is, Lily and Jared are retarded. Trying to be all classy with their canap wedding, but it was so fucking retarded. Everyone was so hungry. There were fucking kids there. You cant, like, not feed kids, you know? So, okay, this is the best parteveryone just fucking left. To go find food. And the only restaurant in the vicinity was a fuck- ing Wendys. So everyone comes back to the fucking reception, with fucking Wendys. Steaming paper bags of fucking Wendys. The entire fucking place smelled like Wendys. Can you imagine? Can you imag- ine that being your wedding?
It could be kind of cool, you know. If you actually, like, planned it like that. Like, you had the whole ceremony, and then everyone was so hungry and it was time to eat and you were like, Hey! Guess what? You get to eat Wendys now! And all the waiters would put paper bags of Wendys down on all these expensive china plates, and everyone would be so stoked. Sorry to be contrary.
No, I get it, Eliza nodded, That would be cool. But it, like, so
wasnt like that.
Yeah, I know, said Allison, Theyre retarded. Charlie walked in.
Hi, girls, he said. For the first time in months, he wasnt wearing


his pale denim housecoat over plaid pajama pants and no shirt with flip-flops. He stole a chocolate out of the Alain Rolancy box, ate it, and sucked the chocolate off his fingers.
France! he announced happily to Eliza, Its something swell, isnt it?
Its something swell, isnt it? Any dumb jerk can prance around with that showy English in front of any woman in the world, and shell fall for it, point finale, no questions asked. Allison watched the lights go on in Elizas eyes and it was over; it wasnt going to play out anything like shed expected. All it took was that one stupid sentence, and now Eliza wouldnt want to hate on Charlie anymore. Now Eliza thought Charlie was charming, and would, in true women are bitches to each other fashion, think Allison to be ungrateful.
There are two sides to every story, was the unwarranted advice she gave as they said good-bye, Hes a really great guy. I know you can make this work.
I dont, said Allison, I dont know that at all.

She never knew what day of the week it was. Charlie stopped leaving his studio. He slept on the floor of his studio.
I should probably do something, Allison decided, and climbed into his makeshift bed: stacks of towels arranged like Jenga pieces and covered with a blanket. She rubbed his back.
Your feet smell, he said into his pillow, Your feet smell fucking disgusting.

Allison called her dad and told him everything.
I dont know what to do! she cried, sobbing, and her dad said nothing, because he didnt know what to say.
FUCK YOU, she screamed into the phone, threw the receiver at the wall, took a sip of Orangina, and tried to walk somewhere. She tripped over a loose cable and stubbed her toe really hard into the ground.
FUCK, she screamed and, making her body go limp like an idiot trying not to get arrested, fell over, still holding one drippy ice cube and the rest could all go fuck themselves for all she cared.


She imagined every little girl in the world standing in a line in front of her, asking her what to do.
What should we do, Allison? they chirped, Please tell us what to do!
Dont do what I did, she told them, slipping the  disgusting  Toms on. She rode her bike to the Jardin botanique with Ghostface on headphones, bangin, found a pond, impulsively threw the Toms into the pond, tore every petal from a water lily and played that old game, gratefully concluding, He loved her not.

Her feet were still bleeding, cut up from the pedals, when she wrote the sentence. She hadnt bothered to bandage them, even wash them, just let the blood cake and hopefully get infected when all the nasty dirt percolated into her bloodstream. Her lips were stained blackish from the wine, she limped to the studio and realized he was sleeping in the bedroom tonight, whatever that meant.
She got into bed and whispered Wake the fuck up, asshole! Grinning, feeling happy, she shoved her bleeding feet into his sleep- ing face.
What the fuck? he asked, waking up, and she pushed her feet harder and harder into his eyes and cheeks, curling her dirty toes around his hawkish, beautiful statement nose, laughing so hed see it was a joke, and he laughed. He grabbed her by both ankles in one hand and flipped her over, laughing so hard, climbed on top of her, and she kissed his neck.
Whats this? he asked, pulling a lily petal out of her hair.
Oh, its a lily petal, she said, pulling it out of his fingers, I guess you love me.
Yeah, he nodded, Its something swell, isnt it?
And whichever book or movie hed stolen that line from, which- ever man he imagined in place of himself as himself to himself, she didnt really mind. It worked.

The fires began the day of the appointment, and the repercussions of both events are making it difficult for Kate to breathe. To find some peace, she busies herself by preparing for her guests who are sched- uled to arrive shortly. She washes the wineglasses and empties the ashtrays. She runs the vacuum and puts clean sheets on the guest bed. She pours a cup of coffee and walks to the front porch, where  she can see the mountains burning north of the city, mushroom clouds of smoke that press against the atmosphere and cement into giant hanging anvils. To Kate the anvils represent a kind of punishment for her recent mistakes, and she would very much like to speak with whomever is controlling the system of ropes and pulleys. She would like to get this over with.

Phil is lost. Kates directions make no sense, and the afternoon sun burns pink through the smear of the bug-splattered windshield. They left Tulsa yesterday morning, doing eighty across the flats of North Texas and through the scorched canyons of Arizona, finally arriving amid the filthy, breathing traffic of Los Angeles sometime around rush hour. Its spring break for the kids, and Phil promised them a week in Southern California. He promised them Hollywood and the beach and Universal Studios, but money is tight and a curtain of fire is closing in on their destination, so hes a little unsure how this will


all play out. These street names arent even in English, he says, straining to read the little blue signs.
What are we looking for? Abby asks. Abby is sixteen and, ac- cording to what she told her friends back home, about one month away from celebrity. She said she was coming to LA to get headshots and a nice tan and maybe talk with some agents her cousin Kate knows, Kate being a pretty good actress herself.
San something, Phil says. San Rafael? Abby asks. No.
Because I just saw San Rafael. Its not San Rafael.
It could be. You said it was San something.
Cut it, Abby, Phil says, riffling through the mess of papers on the dashboard. Where are those directions, Claire?
Claire grabs Phils hand and redirects it back to the steering wheel. Honey, keep your eyes on the road.
My eyes are on the road. But it doesnt do me any good if I dont know where the hell Im going.
Phil is an impatient man with the temperament of an ostrich, and in their twenty years of marriage Claire has learned  to  negotiate  his fits with the caution of a zookeeper. She hands him the Subway napkin he scribbled directions on during lunch in Barstow.
Phil glances down at the napkin, then back at the road. San Fer- nando, he says, suddenly pleased, as if remembering a song title that had temporarily escaped him. Were looking for San Fernando.

They pull into a gas station. Claire and Abby run to the restroom while Phil gasses up. Miles, the youngest, climbs a small hill to  get a better look at the fires. Miles is eleven and large, not fat really, just overinflated. Prior to arriving, he had no interest in this vacation; Los Angeles was not his first choice. His first choice was Alaska, where he knew a kid from his online geology club, a junior volcanologist who invited Miles on a three-day trip to the Chigmit Mountains, home of Mount Redoubt, the most active cone on the North American plate. Aside from the slight chance of being thrown from bed by an eight-


plus magnitude earthquake, Miles expected very little from this trip, geologically speaking. But now, with this new,  unexpected display  of nature, everything has changed and suddenly LA isnt so boring. Dad! he yells, pointing to the sky. Look. Pyrocumulus.
Pretty neat, Phil says, capping the tank. He pulls his phone from his pocket and dials Kate. He says theyre a little lost. He doesnt see San Fernando but he sees a cement river, a truck selling tacos, and a billboard for a movie about robots. He asks if she has any idea where they might be, and, to his surprise, she does. She gives him turn-by- turn directions and says to park on the street.
Abby returns from the mini-mart, Diet Coke in one hand, a maga- zine in the other. Was that her?
Sure was, Phil says.
Who? Miles asks, crawling back into the van. Your cousin Kate, Phil says.
Do I know her?
She was around when you were little. You may not remember her. I dont remember her.
Phil closes the door and keys the ignition. Youll like her. Shes a real California chick. He says this as if she were a type of exotic fruit.

When her uncle Phil called two weeks ago to ask if he and the family could shack up with her for a few nights while they were in LA, Kate scrambled for a reason that wouldnt work. She had a mental  file of excuses for whenever she was asked to take part in something she found unsavory. It was stunning how quickly she remembered the dinner plans with an old co-worker who was leaving town, or the college friend she was planning to visit down in Huntington. But at seven a.M. on a Sunday, hung over and half asleep, she  had  noth- ing. So instead she said, yes, of course, shed love to have them, and ended up committing herself to a weekend of entertaining family she barely knew.
Kates father was the eldest of four boys. Phil, the youngest, worked for a senator in DC and was rarely around, appearing only very briefly with his family on Christmas Eve or Easter morning. One of Kates few memories of Phil is from the Christmas before she moved to LA,


when she saw him slap a five-year-old Miles after the boy flicked a spoonful of mashed potatoes on their grandmothers Nativity set. Kate recognized that her cousin was being a little shithead, but the fury it unleashed in her uncle was something she hadnt seen before. She watched Miles fall into a heap of wailing fat on the kitchen floor as Phil stood over him, threatening to knock his head clean off if he didnt quit his goddamn whining and clean up the mess. An hour later the boy and his father were curled up on the couch in a post- dinner defeat, and Kate remembers the entire day as one big com- plexity of feeling.

Kate sees them approaching from the street, a cloud of ash swirling like fine snow around their heads. We got dinner, Phil says, hold- ing bags from In-N-Out Burger in each hand, displaying them high and proud, like a savage returning with the severed heads of rival tribesmen. He hands the bags to Miles and throws his arms around Kate. So good to see you, kiddo.
You too, she says.
You look wonderful, honey, Claire says. I just love your little house. Its so cute. Abby guessed which one it was when we drove by.
Abby gives Kate a bashful wave. Hi, Im Abby. Not sure if you remember me.
Kate wraps her arms around her younger cousin. Of course I re- member you.
Sooo . . .  Claire says through an eager smile. Give us the grand tour.
Inside, Phil and Miles tear through their burgers, while Kate walks Claire and Abby through the house. When they return to the kitchen, Phil tells Kate about the drive: the lightning storm outside Phoenix and how the Grand Canyon was closed because some animals acci- dentally fell in. Can you believe that? he asks.
No, Kate says.
Good. Because I was making that part up. He lets out a thick belly laugh that leaves Abby shaking her head in a kind of routine  mortification.
Always the comedian, Claire says, smiling at her husband.


Phil has close-cropped hair and some farm in the face. He reminds Kate of someone, someone on television, but it isnt until theyve started in on cocktails that she realizes that person is Glenn Beck.
After dinner Miles retires to the living room and flips through the TV channels, finally settling on local news coverage of the fires. A man with a field of white hair stands in front of a satellite map. He explains that the fires erratic behavior is due to something called coupled fire atmosphere dynamics, the result of the fire and the at- mosphere interacting with each other and creating its own microcli- mate. You guys, Miles yells. Come check this out.
Kate, Phil, and Claire walk to the living room. This is crazy, Miles says. Basically whats happening is that the fire is creating its own weather patterns. Ive never heard of anything like this before. Kate has never heard of anything like this either, but it makes per-
fect sense to her now.
Abby enters the living room holding a doll that emits a piercing wail from a tiny speaker in its back. mum, she says. Will you hold this thing a sec?
Shut it up! Miles says. I cant hear the TV.
You shut up, you fat turd! Abby yells back. She hands the doll to her mother, then fishes through her backpack for a bottle.
Kate looks the doll over. What is that?
This is Baby Think It Over, Claire says, rocking the plastic child. They give these to the kids at school. It makes them think twice when theyre necking at some party.
Abby finds the bottle and takes the doll back from her mother. She inserts the nipple into the babys mouth and the crying subsides. Its the dumbest thing in the world, she says. They act like its the same as a real baby, but its not. I keep the stupid thing in a backpack.
I think its great, Claire says. It cries every so often and if you dont feed it or change the diaper, it sends a message that says youre neglecting the child. I think it really works.
Baby Think It Over. Kate likes that. Thats clever. And such good advice, tooapplicable to so many things. Like how about Drunk Driving Think It Over, or Cocaine Think It Over, or Getting- Impregnated-By-Some-Guy-You-Met-At-A-Bar-And-Then-Aborting-


The-Baby Think It Over. Do they make a doll for those things? She guesses they do not. Shed had to think that last one over for a long time. She stayed in bed for forty-eight straight hours thinking it over. She drove to Bakersfield and back thinking it over. She thought it over in the shower, beads of water racing down her belly and the sum of her mistakes brewing inside. She was raised Catholic and knew that, of all the unkind things shed done in her life, this was the only one that might not be forgivable. She worried that, when she finally did meet someone she loved and wanted to have children with, she wouldnt be able to, that the judgment might come cold and swift, something like: Im very sorry, Kathryn, but you had your chance and you blew it.
Wanna see it? Abby asks, extending the doll. No thanks, Kate says.

With her guests down for the night, Kate pours a glass of wine and sneaks out to the patio for a cigarette. After a mument, the sliding glass door opens and Abby appears with the crying doll, holding a bottle in its mouth. Kate hides the cigarette.
You dont have to hide that from me, Abby says. I have lots of friends who smoke.
Kate takes a drag and points to the crying doll. Whats wrong with your baby?
Its hungry again, Abby says. Stupid thing eats like a horse. I swear Im never having kids.
You dont know that.
Yes, I do. Or at least not until Im old like you. Abby pulls out a chair and sits. After a mument the doll stops crying, letting her know that its full. She sets it on the table and looks to Kate. So youre an actress?
Im a bartender. Sometimes Im an actress, but usually Im a bar- tender.
Do you go on lots of auditions? Not anymore.
Have you done any big movies?
Ive done some small movies. Ive done lots of commercials. For what?


Pizza Hut. Office Depot.
Oh, Abby says, disappointed. How was that? Take a guess.
Do you have a boyfriend? Nope. You?
Abby tells Kate about a guy she had been dating, a senior with an El Camino and a wild streak. Not surprisingly, her father wasnt fond of the kid and went so far as to slash his tires when he found the car parked on the street and the boy hiding under his daughters bed. At school the next day, Abby discovered a note from the boy taped to her locker. He wrote that her father was crazy and a little scary and that he couldnt imagine a scenario in which hed ever be welcome in their home, so it was probably best if they end the relationship before someone got hurt. He wished her a lifetime of happiness and said she owed him eighty bucks for the tires. Thats about the extent of my dating, she says. Pretty pathetic.
Your dads tough,  huh? He makes my  life  hell. Im sure he has his reasons. That doesnt make it okay.
Kate wants to tell her that it could be worse, that it will get worse (oh, you sweet thing, so much worse), but then it will get better too, and back and forth like this it will go forever, sometimes in exag- gerated leaps and falls, but more often in very subtle ways she wont always notice. She wants to tell her all of these things, and she wants to tell her none of them, because she herself remembers what its like to be sixteen and certain.
What do you think will happen if the fire makes it to the city? Abby asks, staring at the distant flames.
I dont know, Kate says. Burn it down?

Its one hundred degrees by noon the next day, so they decide to  head to Venice Beach in search of cooler temperatures and cleaner air. Overnight, a layer of ash has collected on the van, and as they pile in Miles scoops up a handful and throws it in his sisters hair.
Prick, Abby says, kicking him in the shin. Abby! Phil yells.


He just dumped ash in my hair! Abby says. Be nice, Miles, Claire says.
Yeah, Miles, Kate says, grabbing him hard by the neck when no one is looking. Be nice.
When they arrive at the beach, parking is nonexistent and Kate can sense her uncle losing patience. He inches the car forward at a crawl, as if expecting one of the parked cars to suddenly disappear. Kate suggests they visit the pay lot but Phil refuses. According to him, only assholes pay for asphalt.
The car behind them, a white truck, lays on the horn. Its not a polite reminder, not a simple excuse me, sir, but rather a sustained bellow, the kind of honk that conveys a message of deep hate.
Fuck you, pal, Phil yells out the window, flipping the driver the bird.
Phil! Claire says.
Jerks more than welcome to just go around me.
The truck darts in front of them and stops. The driver, a tattooed surfer, gets out and walks to the van.
Dammit, Phil, Claire says. Hes probably got a gun. Just go, Dad, Abby says.
Phil rolls down his window. What? he says in his toughest voice. No, no, no, the surfer says, shoving his middle finger in Phils
face and smiling. Fuck you!
The surfer walks back to his car and Phil rolls up the window. Miles stares at the floor mats, and Claire shakes her head because her husband has done it again. There is a silence in the car, the kind found in long hallways, and it stays like this until Abby spots an an- drogynous figure crossing the street with a bulk-size package of toilet paper. Dude or chick? she says to Miles, breaking the silence.
I dont know, Miles says. But whatever it is, its got a butt hole.

Claire picks a spot near a lifeguard tower and spreads a bedsheet on the sand. With the tide heading out, Miles takes to beachcombing while Abby f lips through a magazine. Phil, still seething, attempts to sleep it off with a nap. Baby Think It Over lies facedown in the sand.


*	*	*
Kate stands and looks at the ocean, studying it like a map, then starts sprinting toward it, high-stepping through the retreating tide- water and throwing her shoulder into the breaking waves. She dives below the surface and swims away from shore. Her stroke is ungainly but effective, and before long shes a hundred yards into the sea. The water is now too deep to stand, so she dog-paddles for a mument, looking back at Abby waving from the beach. She swims on, farther yet, until the shore is a distant thing, a foreign country and a lan- guage she doesnt speak. She remembers a newspaper article she re- cently read about a man who fell from the balcony of a cruise ship late at night. She remembered the wife saying that although she knew her husband was likely dead, what upset her most was the fear he surely felt, the fear every person must feel if alone in a black sea, all life moving slowly away. With this in mind, Kate swims farther still, until the tanker ships that once seemed so distant now appear within reach. She continues on, pushing and pulling through the heavy water. Her arms tire and her breathing quickens. Theres a place in the ocean,   a sort of fence or line, and she knows that if she goes past this point she wont return. She swims until she reaches that line, then touches it with her foot and heads back to shore.
How was it? Claire asks.
Nice, Kate says, the ocean dripping from her.
You were way out there. We couldnt see you after a while.
Kate falls onto her stomach and presses her face into the towel. I couldnt see you guys either.
Miles returns with a handful of shells and stands next to his sister, casting a shadow on her face. Unable to get her attention, he leans over and lets his wet hair drip onto her back.
What are you doing? Abby says, annoyed. Look, he says, displaying his treasures.
Wow, you found shells at a beach. Congratulations.
Miles sits in the sand and begins categorizing his loot, separating the univalves from the bivalves, the keepers from the dreck.
Kate, Abby says, slapping her magazine shut. Lets go to the boardwalk.


Whats a boardwalk? Miles asks.
Dont worry, you wouldnt like it. Abby stands and slides  into her flip-flops. Well be back in a bit, she says to her parents.
Be careful, Phil yells as they walk away. Dont talk to weirdos. That might be tough, Kate says under her breath.

The boardwalk is a salt-stained strip mall, kiosks and small tables situated along the sand. There are women applying henna tattoos and men selling paintings of sunsets and a girl dancing to the beat of tribal drumming. Abby spots a cute boy painting portraits outside a Winnebago decorated with driftwood and Jamaican flags. She grabs Kate by the shirt and tells her to follow.
Abby approaches, smiles at the boy. What do you do? she asks. I paint, the boy says. Want me to paint your picture?
How much?
I dont charge the cute ones. Sit down. Abby looks to Kate for permission.
Go ahead, Kate says. Ill go get something to drink and meet you back here in a bit.
Abby sits on a pair of stacked crates, brushes her hair from her eyes, and feigns elegance.
The boy pulls a clean sheet of paper from his bag of art supplies and fastens it to the easel. Im Zylan, he says. Like Bob Zylan.
Im Abby.
You from around here? he asks, beginning to sketch the outline of her face.
No, but Im moving here soon. Oh, yeah?
Yeah, Im an actress. I just got cast in a new TV show. Cool, what show?
Its on the CW. It hasnt aired yet.
Isnt that channel all cartoons? Zylan asks, coloring her eyes with all kinds of blue.
Youre thinking of the Cartoon Network, she says, staying very still. The CW is really great. The executives are all super nice. They let you be as creative as you want. Its like a big family over there.


Wow, so youre about to be famous? Well see, Abby  says,  giggling. Shhh . . . 
What?
Dont say anything for a minute. Im doing your mouth.

Kate buys a frozen lemonade and wanders the boardwalk. The fires arent as pronounced this close to  the ocean, and for  the first time in a week she is able to take a deep, satisfying breath. She notices an elderly man with a sign that reads: Saul the Spiritual Healer (As Seen on YouTube). She approaches and asks what he does.
I heal people, he says. Spiritually. Yeah, but what does that mean?
I work on the inside. I clean the soulfix karma problems. Stuff like that.
Sounds vague.
Are you feeling spiritually drained? I just feel drained.
Maybe I can help.
I doubt it, Kate says, but thanks.
As much as shed like to believe in Sauls healing power, shes pretty sure he doesnt have the necessary tools, almost certain those instruments dont exist. Its worse at night, this malaise, when she lies awake in bed with the sheets weighing on her like lead aprons. The thing with the baby was a big part of it, but theres also the singledom and the forward march of time and the realization that maybe she isnt very good at the thing she always thought she was really good at. Whatever it is has been festering for weeks, like a squatter siphoning her resources, leaving her unhinged and rotten, wanting for something she cannot put her finger on. She has little faith the hippie can help.
*	*	*
Zylan finishes the portrait and presents it to  Abby.  Though lovely,  it looks nothing like her, and she wonders if hed even been paying attention, or just painting the only girl he knows how. Its really good, she lies. Are you sure you dont want some money for it?


Nope, he says, handing it to her. This ones on the house.
Abby grabs a pen from his easel and signs her name in the bottom right corner. You keep it, she says, handing it back. It might be worth something someday.
Zylan takes the portrait, then looks to the ocean, as if fielding  ideas. Come with me, he says. I want to show you something.

What the fuck? Kate says when she returns to find her cousin and the artist gone. She walks the boardwalk a hundred yards in both directions and then, not finding them, goes to deliver the news.
What do you mean shes gone? Phil says.
Shes not gone, Kate says. They probably just wandered off somewhere.
They?
She made a friend. A boy?
Yeah.
Dammit, Kate, Phil says. He pulls on his shirt, slides into his sandals, and grabs his cell phone. Call me if she turns up, he says, walking away.
This is the kind of shit that drives Phil nuts, this testing of bound- aries. He believes in the sanctity of order and the importance of consequences, which is why he will search every square foot of this goddamn beach until he finds his daughter, and when he does he will have some choice words for the little shit, words that hes cur- rently arranging in his head as he weaves through the archipelago of beachgoers.

The area under the pier smells of dead fish and urine. Deflated bal- loons and punctured soccer balls collect in the shallow water sliding along the sand. If this is some kind of club, its one Abby has no in- terest in joining. Its grossly unromantic and she wonders why Zylan brought her here. What do you think? he asks.
Its nice, she lies. Do you come here a lot?
Kind of. Its like my tree house without trees. I come here to think, he says, pulling a pipe from his pocket. And to get stoned.


Abby has never seen a pipe like this before, all glass and swirling colors. The only one shed ever known was the smooth wood piece her grandfather used to pull out after hearty meals. Zylan twists off a small bud and presses it into the bowl. Do you get high? he asks. Abby says yes, though the truth is she does not. The only people she knows who get high are the stoners at school, brooding kids with dirty hair and poor attendance. She remembers a story a teacher once told her about a girl who smoked pot and jumped in front of a train. She was terrified by the idea of smoking anything that might make her want to jump in front of a train, and so when the joint was passed her way at parties or after football games she always politely declined, claiming an impending drug test or some lingering virus. But look- ing square in front of Zylan is not an option, so she puts the lighter to the bowl and feels the burn crawl down her throat. She coughs and
hands the pipe back to him. You okay? he asks.
Fine, she says, letting out a few more hacks. Just went down  the wrong tube.
Zylan steps closer and puts his hand on the small of her back. You sure youre okay?
Fine, she says, smiling, eyes watering. Totally fine.
Are you sure sure? he says again, this time wrapping his arms around her waist and pressing his lips to hers. His mouth goes to work, wide and ravenous, devouring the bottom half of her face, like a boy eating a large sandwich. Abby has never been kissed like this before and prays he isnt leaving marks her father will notice. After a mument, Zylan pulls away and smiles.
Wow, she says. Youre a passionate kisser. Duh, he says. Im an artist.

Zylan has her in the sand now, one hand through her hair, the other searching her pants. This is the furthest shes ever gone with a boy, and she recognizes the mument as something important, a milestone, a memory she will carry with her for some time. Zylan kisses a line down her stomach, then looks across the beach. Uh-oh, he whis- pers into her belly button. Weve been spotted.


Standing fifty yards away, Phil has now seen everything he needs to see and starts jogging toward the young couple. Abby,  spotting her fathers large frame charging toward them, pulls her shirt down and says, Oh, shit, because she knows whatever is about to happen will not be good. Zylan, a little confused, stays real still and watches as Phil grabs him by the shirt and throws him in the sand. He drags the boy into the shallow water and puts a knee to his back, pinning him with the weight of his body. Abby screams, Stop it, Dad! Stop! but her dad doesnt stop, instead taking it further, now holding the boys head under water and rubbing it back and forth in the sand, like a man scrubbing a dirty dish, all the while screaming, Thats my daughter, you little shit! as if his words might reach the boy with his head under water.
Kate arrives in time to see Zylan wrest himself from Phils control and sprint away. She watches her uncle standing in the shallow water, his hands trembling, while Abby sobs dramatically in the sand. Kate looks to the north, where the fire has quieted significantly, now just a smoldering mass of embers, then begins walking away, not feeling sympathy or pity so much as relief that a little order has been restored and the fire on the mountain has finally run out of things to burn.


There was a girl gone missing a few years back. Her mama standing out front of the Dairy Queen, eyeing your cone like you was hiding her child within. You seen Dee? Dee Switcher? You seen her? Nope, was always the answer, but Ill keep an eye out. And before you knew it that cone was gone.
That was the year that old bitch Miss Shane was teaching us alge- bra. Solve for x, children. Chalk dusting her dress like she had a ghost dress on over her other one. Them arms like dough on a spit.
That missing girl used to do her eyeliner during class. Over and over, underlining her eye like Miss Shane underlined them nasty equations. Solve for x.
We all had plans for that girl. She had a chest. She smoked them long thin lady cigarettes in plain sight of the custodian. When that retarded boy ran into the girl and knocked her purse down a condom spilled out, flashing there in its gold wrapper, looking for all the world like a coin.
The girl picked up her lipsticks and wallet and hair things and left it there, left that condom on the ground and walked off. Us thinking hard about ways to spend that coin.
There was other girls of course. The entire cheerleading team could get you going, save for the chubby one, but shed do in a pinch. The majorette, Glenda was her name, rumor had it shed drink too much at parties and beg you to fondle her.


So it wasnt like this girl was the cream of the crop or nothing, there was plenty of girls. We wanted them all, Dee Switcher included. Her mama was the town skank. Everybody knew. So you couldnt take her all that seriously when her girl went missing. Stay home all night for once, our own mamas would whisper to each other, swat
each other on the arm. You so bad. I know it.
Nobody ever picked up that condom. It got kicked around and pushed into corners, and once Dee went missing we all got scared of it, and kicked it harder. Girls would shriek should they see it rocket- ing toward them. Some boys too.
Then one day we all realized it wasnt there no more. Probably the custodian got it. Or it was somewhere no one cared to look.
Her daddy came to the school on a  Monday  morning.  No  one had seen her daddy in years but here he was asking where was Dee, why did the school let her skip so easy, where was the truant officer, demanding to know who took her, who had his girl. We watched the principal pet his shoulder like you would a sick animal, watched Dees daddy get led to the door; it was a bright day and for a second he got swallowed up by the glare. He didnt come back.
There was a big homecoming dance a few months after the girl went gone. We all paired up and parted our hair and wore suit coats and danced slow when we were told to.
Dees mama showed up at the dance in a fancy nightgown dress thing, asking could she chaperone. We watched the principal lead her over to the punch bowl, but Dees mama wasnt there for long; no  one came for punch and after a few songs she walked out with her head so high you worried for her neck.
Some of us met at the diner after, eating pancakes while our girls fiddled with our belt loops under the table, if you were lucky. Others of us went to the after party at  the Days  Inn, but  that turned out  to be a bust. The stereo ran out of batteries and Miss Shanes fresh- man boy showed up and puked into the trashcan and everybody went home.
Dee had left school after fifth period, was the story. Snuck out while everyone was scrambling for their lockers. Rumor had it she was going with an older boy, he might could even be called a man.

A Girl	157

One day a skinny lady cop came and asked a few of us what we knew, but really we didnt know nothing.
We skipped school all the time, was the thing. Sometimes it felt like if you didnt skip youd close your eyes  and die, right there in  the middle of Civics, so you did skip, and youd  go  to  the Circle  K to buy Slim Jims or over to a friends house to look at his dads titty magazines. And nothing bad ever happened.
The lady cop seemed to find us not knowing nothing a relief. Thats what I figured, shed say in agreement with you. Which meant, to us, solving for x really was an impossibility, a waste of time, so why bother?
At Christmastime Miss Shane told us she had skin cancer, she wouldnt be back the next semester. We stared at that mole on her cheek, as we had done for months. Thats what I figured, some of us wanted to blurt. Miss Shanes eyes went wet, we started feeling soft toward her, but after she assigned two chapters of homework for over the break we went back to hating her guts, which felt better, more normal, than feeling sorry for her, so in a way you got to feeling grateful toward her for being such a cooze.
Over the break we saw Dees little brother at the movies by his- self. We forgot all about him, but there he was with his money in a wad, staring up at the listings like he couldnt read. We went on in and spent all our money on arcade games. Then later that night, in your bed that smelled like socks and sweat and secretions and powder Tide, if you werent careful youd start thinking how when you came out the boy was gone, and how maybe you should feel regretful about not inviting him to man the firetorch gun, really the best gun to have if you were playing Immortal Fear and you made it past the first two rounds, which everyone did.
But he had gone.
That winter someone  found  the girls  yellow  purse on  the side  of the road. The strap was gone. One of us heard their dad saying how you could use a strap to strangle someone, or  at  least  tie up her hands. Her perfume bottle was smashed. That girl aint coming back, we told each other, shifting our nuts like wed seen our dads do whenever they said something serious.


But really, we already knew that. You just had to say some things out loud.
During the spring semester Miss Shanes boy got in a fistfight with the custodian. No one knew why but we figured it was stressful, having a bitch mum who had cancer. Then on Palm Sunday a dog found a skull and carried it to his masters doorstep. There was excite- ment for a time but it turned out to be the skull of an infant, probably buried by some of them country folk who cant afford no funeral.
A rumor got spread that a girl tasted like a nine-volt battery down there. It got hot, hotter than the last summer, and a old lady died in her house cause she was too weak to open some windows.
Wed see Dees mama working as the greeter at the Walmart. If she recognized you shed say, Seen Dee? Dee Switcher? and most of the time we just shook our heads, stared at our shoes till we got to the magazines aisle. Guns and girls, we needed more info on both.
Some of us got for-real girlfriends. Some of us snuck in to their rooms at night and made love, you had to call it making love or your girl got mad, to these girls while you listened to their dads sawing logs just to the other side of the wall, you biting your girls pillow hard so you wouldnt make no noise, you ignoring how sometimes your girl just laid there, her fingertips on your back limp and unin- terested, you despite the dud your girl turned out to be feeling like your bottom half was exploding up into your top.
Dee one time punched a girl in the mouth, shed been crying hard just before, her face ruined, black smears down her cheeks and her upper lip all glistened with snot. By that time we knew girls some- times got ugly. Dee got sent home, came back the next day with her makeup all set again. Lips all wet. Eyes so blue you got to feeling indecent. See, we had seen Dee, wed seen her a lot, but back then we had our eyes on all the girls, and over time it got to be hard to see how losing one was such a tragedy.

Are you interested in me because Im a girl or because I love Jesus? I am interested in you because I like you.
But if I didnt love Jesus, would you still be interested in me?    I would like to think that I would be interested in you no matter
what.
But if I didnt love Jesus, I dont think I would be the same person.
If you didnt love Jesus, I think in some ways you would be the same person.
But I wouldnt see the world the same way, I wouldnt read the same things, I wouldnt make the same choices, I wouldnt be around the same people.
But I think you would still like a lot of the same things. You would still be a ski instructor in the winter. You would  still spend the summer here on the beach. You would still run. You would still bodysurf. You would still be physically very beautiful. You still would be a person who cares about other people, and you still, probably, would have taught me to bodyboard.
But I used to be a person who didnt love Jesus. I used to make different choices. Like when I was a freshman in college, there was this older guy, and he used to come into my room and sleep in my bed and he knew how to do things with his hands and his mouth. He knew how to make me feel things.


You didnt have sex with him even though you didnt yet love Jesus.
I didnt have sex with him because I had an idea of Jesus, but I didnt yet really know Jesus. I thought I did, but I didnt.
But you prayed to  Jesus,  didnt  you? I did pray to Jesus, but not in tongues. When you start to pray in tongues?
When I was filled up with the Holy Spirit.
Is that when you stopped messing around with this guy?
No. It was later. There were other guys. In Madrid, this one guy took me to an R.E.M. concert.
Did it make you feel dirty to mess around with him? No. It made me feel good. But I still felt empty inside. How did you learn how to pray in tongues?
I prayed to be filled up with the Holy Spirit, and then I was given the gift.
Can you do it on command?
I can do it anytime, if thats what you mean. Can I hear you do it?
Would you like to pray with me? Will you do it if I pray with you?
When I pray I do it. It comes naturally.
How do you know what it is you are saying if you are speaking a language you dont know?
I dont know what I am saying. It is my spirit that knows what I am saying. My spirit is communing directly with Gods spirit. I cant explain it, but I can feel it, like this energy pulsing through me.
If I held your hand, could I feel the energy, too? I feel like you are being glib.
I am not being glib. I just feel like this is something I dont un- derstand but I really do want to understand. I want to be a person who is open-minded to new experiences.
Take my hand. Here. Take my other hand. Lets pray.

What did you think just now,  when  I  was speaking in tongues? I thought a lot of the sounds were repeated and there were a


lot of consonant clusters. I heard maybe some sounds that sounded like German and some sounds that sounded like Hebrew or Arabic maybe. There were also a lot of sounds that you dont make when  you speak in English, like rolling your Rs and flattening out your O sounds.
Thats true. I have noticed those things, too.
Do you ever try to think about recording what you say when you say it? Like, maybe you could do some code-breaking and make a dictionary.
Again, I feel like maybe you are being glib.
Hear me out. Im being serious. The idea is, you are speaking a language that people dont speak on Earth, except people who speak the language of angels. So consequently, if you follow the logic, its a real language. So wouldnt it have the things a real language has, like grammar and syntax and vocabulary? And if thats so, couldnt you study it just like you could study any other language?
Thats movie stuff. Thats like something starring Patricia Ar- quette.
Why not, though? Theres people who do this for a living. They go over to Papua New Guinea or wherever, and they spend time around a language, and then they reconstruct it, even though when they first get there they dont know the first thing about it.
Thats missing the whole point. Why?
Because if you knew the language, then the purity of the com- munication would be lost. Youd start crafting all the words instead of the spirit that indwells in you crafting the words.
Butand here Im not being glib, Im just trying to under- standdont you want to know what it is you are speaking to Jesus or the angels or whatever?
You dont pray to angels.
But its an angel language, right?
The idea is that youre not in control. Youre giving yourself over to it.
Is that why you jerk your body to the left when you pray in tongues?


Thats a manifestation. Why do you do it?
I dont do it. It comes over me when I give myself over to the Spirit.
Does it happen to everyone who speaks in tongues? Some people fall down like they are dead.
Thats slain in the Spirit.
Right. Some people fall into fits of laughter. Some people bark like dogs, but not too many people. I dont want to judge, but I think sometimes when that happens a lot it can be for show. But I dont know.
Thats something that worries me. Its a little bit frightening, dont you think, like on TV, when a lot of people are doing it all around, and theres this ungodly cacophony?
Thats the fear of the Lord youre feeling. How can you be sure?
How can you be sure of anything? You know. I know. I know that I know that I know.
Here this stuff is at odds with logic, maybe, I think.
I think thats a wrong way to think about it, but tell me what youre thinking.
I took this philosophy class. Dr. Willard Reed. He was talking about the distinction between belief and knowledge. He said that knowledge is problematic. You cant really know stuff that isnt some- how verifiable. Like you didnt see it with your own eyes, or experi- ence it yourself, or there hasnt been some kind of consensus among the people who study the thing. And even then theres problems. How do you know you arent fooling yourself? Or how do you know the consensus might not be wrong? Like the consensus used to be that the earth was flat. And on top of that, how do you know that the universe didnt just begin two seconds ago? After a while, everything starts to be belief.
I dont guess it matters much which is which, then, if its all so slippery.
I dont guess it does.
But what kind of way is that to live? Walking around not being sure of anything. Everything tentative. No place for boldness. No


place for meaning. Wouldnt that just throw you into some kind of paralytic feedback loop or something? Wouldnt you just be staring at your navel forever?
Not necessarily, but I dont know. You just described a lot of the way I think a lot of the time.
Thats why you have to let go control. Thats what praying in the Spirit is. Youre letting go that control and giving yourself over to your Creator. Its an act of faith in the unseen. Although, I have to tell you, there are things I have seen.
What kinds of things? Visions. Gold dust. Gold dust?
There have been meetings where the Spirit of God has come down and the manifestation was gold dust that began to appear on everyones shoulders.
Manifestations, like the jerking to the left.
Im not going to say any more if youre going to mock every- thing.
Honestly, Im not mocking. I really want to know. Tell me about the visions.
Once I was praying in the Spirit, and I had a vision of a golden vessel.
Like a ship?
Like a vase or a container. It was on a cloth of purple silk. There was an angel there, and he was holding out his hands.
What did the vision mean?
For a long time I didnt know what the vision meant. But then my friend who is a prophetessquietly, quietly a prophetess, like, literally, hardly anybody knows. She said it was a message about being a vessel for the Spirit, and about a royal calling, but I had to give myself to it.
Thats why you write the magazine articles?
Thats why Im writing the books. Thats why Im traveling around so much. To speak into peoples hearts and lives.
But you like it, too. Youre good at it. You dont want to work at a desk job.
Thats true. I dont want to be chained to a desk. I was made this way for a reason.


Any other visions? Yes.
Tell me.
Another time. Later.
All right. Its a lot to risk, right? Telling me all these things? Its nothing to risk. I already have given myself over to all of it. I can wait. I want to get to know you.
Would you hold me now? Yes.
Dont come over here inside my blanket. You stay inside your blanket and Ill stay inside my blanket, and you can hold me that way, with the separate blankets.

Do you like it here?
Im uncomfortable here. Why?
I dont like the cold, and I dont like all the soldiers in their uni- forms, and I dont like all the military songs. I think I might be a pacifist.
But these are the men and women who give their lives to keep us free.
I like watching the football game, and I dont mind cheering for Air Force, but I am uncomfortable with the whole martial atmo- sphere. It seems to me to have a lot to do with death and killing.
But sacrificial death and killing, dont you think? Not death or killing that anyone wants to do.
I dont know if thats true. Thats what basic training is for, I think. To break down the part of a persons conscience where they have this inhibition against killing, so they can want to kill, so they can kill at will, to save their lives or save their buddy or fulfill their mission.
I think thats a selfish way to think about it. Because its because of these guys and gals here that you have the freedom to say some- thing like that.
I cant deny it. I know thats true. That complicates the way I feel about it.


You are shivering. Here, lets combine our blankets.
Can we put them under our legs, too, because these bleachers are so cold.
You know, if you moved out here with me, I wonder if you could take the cold all winter, if this is what it does to you.
Are you really here for good? I mean, you were in Florida, and now youre here, and youve been back and forth. But maybe you would just end up back in Florida.
I dont want to be anchored anyplace. I want to be free to move around. But I like cold places. I wouldnt mind moving to Alaska. My aunt has a hotel in Alaska. I like the idea of spending some time there with her, helping her run it for a while.
What if youeven wehad children? Wouldnt you want to stay put for a while, for the sake of stability?
I dont want to have children, ever. I mean, I love children. I think I would be an okay mother. But the things Im meant to do with my life would, I think, make it very difficult to have children.
I didnt know this about you, that you wouldnt want children.
It surprises me.
This is why its good, I think, you came out here. We need to sort these things out. We need to find out if we love each other.
I feel like youre holding some things back.
Thats true, but here we are, and I want to watch this football game since I paid forty bucks each for the tickets.

Is it okay with you if I put my hand on your knee while I drive? Yes. Im very happy that you put your hand on my knee.
Its interesting, you know. Whenever I relate to you in a physical way, you respond very positively. But whenever I relate to you in a spiritual way, it gets complicated, and I dont know how to read you, exactly.
I feel like in some ways they are different issues. I dont think they are in any way separable.
I feel like the physical expressions of love are very important and they mean something.
I dont disagree. Thats why I wont let you kiss me.


But its strange. You will let me do other things that seem to me to be more intimate than kissing is.
I feel like, if you and I were kissing, I would be giving myself over to you in a way that Im not ready to do.
Why is that?
Because I think that spiritually we are in very different places. I think youre open to spiritual things, but I dont think that you are really very far along. And I cant tell if you are open to them because you really desire them or if you are just open to them because you want to be closer to me.
Thats a fair question to raise. I dont know, either, sometimes. Theres a lot of things going on very quickly, and it can be confusing to me.
Also, I dont know if I love you.
Do you think love is some kind of lightning flash? Like it strikes you and then the reverberations just ring out forever?
Thats how love is with God, I think. And I think thats  one  thing you havent really entered into the fullness of.
I think that maybe love is a choice that people make. Thats not very romantic.
I dont know what good romance is, sometimes. I mean, its good to be romantic, and its good to have feelings. But Ive had feelings for people before, and theyve had feelings for me, but what was lack- ing, I think, was a choice to make a life together. A commitment.
Its very scary to me to hear you speak that way. Because it seems very mechanical to me. It seems in keeping with many of the things that seem cold about you, to me. Everything seems so reasoned, so calculated. It makes me think that everything about the way you ap- proach me must be some kind of calculation.
If that were true, though, wouldnt I just tell you everything you wanted to hear all the time? It seems to me evidence of good faith that we have these kinds of conversations all the time, and that we have these, for lack of a better word, arguments, or disagreements.
I dont enjoy arguing or disagreeing. Me either.
Im just going to keep my hand on your leg here, except when I


have to shift gears, until we get up to the top of the mountain, okay? I just want to enjoy the ride and enjoy you and enjoy this kind of close- ness while we look at the mountains and enjoy the creation and all its wonder. Its not a slight to you. Its just something I need right now, if its all right with you. But I want to keep my hand on your leg, okay? Of course. I love that you have your hand on my leg. It is really
nice.

That right there is called Witchs Titty. Why?
Because look at it. It looks like a Witchs Titty. Yeah. I guess it does.
You know what I think whenever I pass this place? Tell me.
There was this dance in high school, and there was this boy, lets call him Bob, he asked me to this dance. He was a senior and I was a freshman. I got all dressed up and he got me a corsage. When you go with a senior and youre a freshman, its exciting, you know, because he picked you. Youre the one he picked, and he passed over older girls to pick you. And before I left, my dad told him he could keep  me out until midnight but no later. And he kissed me on the cheek, my dad, and he said I love you and we trust you, me and your mother. So we went to this dance, and it was all right. There was music, there was food, there was dancing. And afterward, I wanted this guy, Bob, to kiss me. It was something I really wanted. I had built it up big-time in my mind. He drove me out to this park Im going to take you to later, out by the ski lifts. It was the place where all the kids went to sit in their cars and make out. We had to drive past Witchs Titty to get there. And I knew that was why we were going to this park, and it was okay with me. But when we got there, this guy, Bob, he started acting really nervous. He was staring straight ahead and he started sweating at his forehead. I felt sorry for him because I could tell he was very nervous. Then he said, like he was apologizing, This is just some- thing I really have to do.  And he leaned toward me and I thought  he was going to kiss me. But then he put his hands up my dress. I wanted to say no to him, but I was so surprised I guess my voice


caught in my throat. And then I put my hand down there to push his hand away and he grabbed my wrist and held it so hard that it bruised a ring around my wrist where he was holding it. Then he put his hand in my panties and he stuck his finger up inside me and poked around. It didnt hurt. It didnt feel good, either, but it didnt hurt. Then he just held his finger in there like that for a while and moved it around. Then he drove me home.
What did you do?
I didnt do anything. I went inside and went to bed and stared    at the ceiling for a long time. It wasnt until a lot later that I cried.
So nothing happened to him?
Hes still around. We became friends again later. I forgave him. I dont forgive him.
You dont have to. But  thats  something  youll  have  to  work  on. Unforgiveness. Like the things you sometimes say about your mother.
I just feel protective of you. I dont like it that for him there were no consequences.
You carry the consequences around inside yourself, dont you? Me or him?
Something about you reminds me of him sometimes. That makes me feel terrible that you would say that.
I just think theres things you should know about me if we are really going to think about being together.
Is that what were doing?
Its just something I thought of because we were driving by Witchs Titty. Thats all.

When a long time passes like this and youre so quiet, I wonder what youre thinking.
Do you think you have  the right to  know what  Im  thinking? I had a girlfriend in college one time who used to say things like
that. She used to say, You know what I like about my thoughts? Theyre mine. I dont have to share them with you.
Did she say that after you were prying at her to give up her thoughts?


Usually, yes.
All right. What do you want to know? So many things.
You choose one thing. Any one thing. Ill tell you.
One thing. Okay, the visions. You told me one  time you  would tell me more about the visions.
You see this here?
What? The road? The mountains? The sky?
The motion, through space. Through time, too. Once I was driving this road, and I had a vision of motion through space and through time.
While you were driving?
I saw all of creation as though it were a liquid, and we were swim- ming through it. Me, and all the creatures, land creatures and water creatures, too. The water was a deep blue, sparkling, but also translu- cent. You could see through it. And the rock faces were shimmering like precious jewels.
Was this a distraction while you were driving?
It was almost as if I were no longer driving anymore. I had given up control and although in the physical world my hands were  on  the wheel, and even though in the vision I was moving through a space not unlike the one we are moving through right now, and even though I had given up control, and even though there was that drop- off there just out your window, a couple thousand feet, maybe, I wasnt afraid. What I was mostly was in awe.
Was it like you imagined seeing these things, or was it like you actually were moving through these things?
It was physically real. I could even smell the perfume of it. What did it smell like?
There was a sweetness to it. There was a honey-and-almond qual- ity to it.
Was the car moving through it, too?
The car went away. It was just my body being carried forward on the current of it.
Sometimes when you talk about these things, I want to believe you, and I want to understand, because I do believe you, but it is


very hard to believe you, and it is very hard to try to know how to understand.
Because you arent yet seeing with the eyes of the Spirit. Because I havent had experiences like this, and Ive never known
anyone else who has. There is a certain light that gets in your eyes when you talk about them, and it is a little bit frightening to me.
Thats something you have to let go. Maybe so, but I dont know  how. You do it by doing it.
Thats easy to say, but if it were easy to do, wouldnt many other people do it? If nothing else, to speak the tongues of angels and har- vest the gold dust and sell it at market rate?
When you speak of it that way, it makes me angry.
I dont mean to make you angry, and I am not making fun. I like you and possibly want to love you. Im just trying to look at what youre saying from all different directions and turn it over in my mind that way.
Thats not letting go. Thats holding on to control. I dont know what to say.
Maybe it would be better not to say anything else for a while. Okay. All right. Okay.

Rise and shine. Im so tired. Its morning. Its dark.
The idea is to hit the slopes early. Really, Im wiped.  Im  sorry. Im turning on the light.
Please dont. Really. I dont know if its the altitude or the nonstop going or just maybe general emotional exhaustion. Im not trying to bail out on you. Im still willing to  ski. But  my  body doesnt  want to get up so early right now, and I feel like I should listen to it so I dont get sick.
It smells like sickness in here. Your breath has a sinus quality to it. Thats what Im talking about.


The only way out is through. Please, get up. Lets ski.
You know people there. Why dont you go on without me, and let me catch up with you this afternoon.
Really?
Please understand.
Really? This is really the choice you are making? Please?

There are many ways in which I feel more like your mother than like a person with whom you might be falling in love.
This is because I didnt go skiing this morning.
Its so many things. You are, I have come to believe, a fundamen- tally passive person.
What do you mean?
Like it was me who drove all the way here from Colorado Springs. I cant drive a stick shift.
I offered to teach you.
Dont you think it would be horrible to try to learn while driving up the steepest mountains in the whole country?
Those are in Alaska. Those drop-offs, though. But thats a spirit of fear.
Thats a spirit of safety. I want to be safe. I want you to be safe.  I dont mind learning to drive a stick, but I want to learn in a park- ing lot.
I have to ask you to clean up after I make dinner, or to do the dishes.
Were staying in all these houses where friends of yours are out of town for the winter. I dont know what I should and shouldnt be touching or when it is an imposition to take the initiative. Its a situa- tion where I feel like youre in the drivers seat and Im mostly taking my cues from you.
Im thinking about gender roles here. It seems to me  like the man should be taking the leadership roles in a relationship. But you are always taking your cues from me. I am the de facto leader, even though I am a woman.


There have been many instances where I have tried to take the lead, but you have made it clear that you dont like the choice I make. Thats what I mean by passive. You just concede the high ground
to me.
I dont think you would respond well to being strong-armed. With love you have to do it. With love.
To me, the more loving thing would be more of a give-and-take.
More of a partnering kind of thing.
I feel like, because you are so passive, that one day the anger is going to come spilling out. I feel like you dont tell me when you are really angry.
I have only one time been angry, but I knew it wasnt right to be angry, so I didnt say anything about it to you.
When?
When you were still living in Florida and you went to visit that guy in North Carolina and you rode on the back of his motorcycle and you called me and told me what a good time you were having  there on the back of his motorcycle.
Thats true. That was fun. Really, truly fun. I loved visiting him, and I loved going for a ride on his motorcycle.
That made me angry, but I didnt say anything because I didnt feel like I had the right to say anything because I dont own you, we arent committed, you have the right to make your own choices.
So why get angry?
Because I wanted you to be having fun with me and not that guy on that motorcycle.
You dont own a motorcycle.
I dont even like motorcycles. People I knew kept getting killed  on motorcycles.
So you were worried about me getting killed?
No, I was mostly worried about you having fun. And one other thing.
What?
I know some women who had orgasms from riding motorcycles.   I had a picture of you with your arms around his waist, riding those mountain roads, holding on to him, having an orgasm.


So you werent concerned about whether I was going to get killed?
Did you have an orgasm?
Of all of the questions you should never have asked, this is the number one question you never should have asked.

Your flight leaves in six hours, so I think we ought to leave in three. That gives us an hour to get to the airport and an hour for security and baggage and another hour cushion in case we hit bad traffic.
Let me finish packing my things, and then do you want to have dinner together before I leave?
You can have dinner at the airport, and its too early anyway, dont you think? I dont think Ill be hungry until much later.
The reason I was thinking dinner was I have a feeling that after today we may not keep seeing each other anymore.
I havent decided about that yet.
If that is what happens, I want to spend one last nice time with you and let you know that I cared about you and that I care about you.
Thats something I want, too. Im going  into  the bedroom  and lie down while you finish packing. Im tired, and I know youre tired. When youre done packing, why dont you come into the bedroom  and lie down and rest?

I love holding you. Shh.
I mean it. This is something I will take with me when I leave. Shh.

The reason I cant let you kiss me is the same reason as always. Even though right now I want you to kiss me. Do you understand?
I dont understand.
I want you to understand. I dont want you to be hurt.
I will be hurt, but lets not talk about it right now and interrupt what is nice.
Will you do one thing for me? When we get to the airport?


Yes?
When you go through the gate, and you want to turn around and look at me, dont look back.
I know what it means, for you to say  that to  me  now. Shh. Put your face against mine. Touch your face to mine. I dont know what to say.
Dont say anything. Just put your face against my face. Language fails.
Just close your eyes and let go for a while. Lets be together.
Lets be.
But what does it mean?
You dont have to understand what it means. I dont understand what it means. Its not less beautiful if you understand it.
I want it to mean when we get to the gate Im going to turn around and take one last look at you.
Shh.
So I can remember you until the next time I see you. Shh.
I love the way it feels, being so close to you. No more words.


Finally. Thats what I thought when the reporter from the Times
called about Greg.
Every reading I went to, every opening, every show from Chelsea to Bushwick, I talked about Greg and Cara: about our time together at Wilmott, Gregs music, and the tragedy that took him from us. Id corner any art-schooled, trust-funded loft-dweller whod listen and say, Someone needs to tell Gregs story.
Invariably theyd say, Youre a writer. Who better than you? So Id have to explain that of course Id written about Greg, how could I not, but I only know how to write plays, and getting the backing for   a show about him, enough to do it right, on the scale he deserved,  was tough right now. If they knew me, or knew of me, this would sur- prise them. Didnt you win that Kennedy Center Young Playwrights thing? theyd ask. Thats got to count for something, right? Id tell them that was a long time ago, another lifetime, when Greg was still with us and I believed Broadway was just waiting for me to remake it, and Cara was the spark that kept the fire burning in both of us. The music industry had nearly missed out on Greg, and I wasnt going to just wait around for the theater industry to wake up from its stupor. What I needed was someone who could get the word out right away. Someone who could make Gregs story, our story, into news.
I never doubted the call would come. Id prayed for it. Dont get


me wrong: that wasnt the source of my confidence. I mean, I figured God owed us one, me and Cara, but Im not the kind of Christian who thinks of Him as a wish-granting genie. The reason I was so cer- tain was that Id put in the time. Id gotten to know the right people. That was why the three of us had come to New York in the first place. Truth be told, Greg and Cara never really settled in. They missed Ohio something awful, especially Wilmott, with its red brick and redder maples. I tried to get them excited about steampunk exhibi- tions and political burlesque, but the two of them preferred to hole up in their crummy apartment in the East Village, playing at the domes- ticity they would have had if theyd stayed behind: Cara canned green beans; Greg searched the animal shelters for an Irish setter in need of a home, though he knew their place was too small. Id forward them invitations, and Greg would just say he was allergic to cheese cubes.
So I had to network for all of us. You see, I said silently to Greg when the reporter called, I told you it would pay off in the end.
He said his name was Mike. Amy Wright told me about your friend.
Amy had been in a few of my one-acts back when I was killing myself trying to get into festivals. You try hard not to be too im- pressed by people in this town, but I was impressed that Amy had  an in at the Times. Id been hoping to get to someone at New York magazine, maybe Esquire. But the Times ?
How do you know Amy? I asked.
We dated last summer, Mike said, which didnt exactly answer the question but was enough for me. Thats what I admire about New York: people are sophisticated about their relationships. They hook up, they break up, but they stay cool, keep each other in mind. The door is always open to exesand friends of exes.
What she told me was really sad and interesting, Mike went on. She said I needed to talk to you to get the whole story.
I waited a beat to answer. Im an award-winning playwright. I know how to build suspense.
He was a genius and cancer ate his brain. Thats the story, man. Mike cleared his throat. Some directors and actors I know hate that sound, but I understand what it means: someone in the audience
is unnerved. Youve got your hook in him and he feels the pull.


Could we meet in person, maybe tomorrow? Mike said. It doesnt feel right to talk about this on the phone.
Ive got prayer group till ten, I said, and I teach an improv class at five. Anytime between, Im yours.

I suggested we meet at the High Line. I cant stand hanging out in the coffee shops, surrounded by all the laptop jockeys working on their projects. None of the successful artists I know do it. If you want to be out in the world, be out in the world.
For decades, the High Line was a blight; now its an inspiration, tall grass and taller flowers sprouting between rusted rails, all kinds of cool art installations claiming the dead space between buildings. And whos responsible? Just a couple of guysone of them a writer guys with a vision, guys who knew how to line up the right people. The High Line is my kind of place.
Mike was about my size, which is to say short, but he was stocky where I was wiry, grizzled where I was clean-shaven. And his clothesno comparison there. The summer between high school and Wilmott, I signed up for an exchange program, spent a month   in China. The lasting legacy of that trip was the five three-piece suits I had made to order, still the best hundred bucks I ever spent. I was wearing the gray pinstripe for my meeting with Mike, a white shirt open at the collar, no tie. Mike was wearing jeans and a Columbia hoodie. Taking him in, I had to revise my opinion of Amy just a little. She slept with him? New York Times, I reminded myself.
Which section do you write for? I asked.
Mike took one hand out of the marsupial pocket of his hoodie and scratched his beard. I freelance for a few different sections.
A freelancer. I smiled to hide my annoyance. I wondered if hed pitched the story yet, if the Times was even interested.
I think this would be a good fit for Our Towns, Mike said.
Id never heard of Our Towns. The name made me suspicious that he was going to portray us as a bunch of hicks whod  been chewed  up and spit out by the big city. Be cool, I told myself. He hasnt even heard what you have to say yet.
Hey, youre the writer of this little piece, I said. Im just the subject.


Mike squinted at me. Isnt Greg the subject?
Source, I said. I meant Im just a source. On impulse, I  grabbed his shoulder and squeezed. But youve got to understand. This is a story about the three of us. Greg, Cara, and me.
I looked Mike straight in the eye and waited. He nodded and pulled his other hand out of that baggy front pocket. It was holding  a tape recorder.
How do you want me to start? I asked. But I already knew how   I was going to start.
Amy said you met Greg in college?

All three of us were from small towns outside Cincinnati. Wilmott was something else altogether, a tiny campus lost in rolling farm- land. It was a place for church-raised kids to prepare for a decent, thoughtful life of hard work and service. But even out in the heart- land, among the righteous, there are the weirdos, the ones who can recite every word of Monty Python by heart, who hear Gods voice more clearly in Jeff Buckley than the chapel hymns. That was me and Greg. He was the first to respond to my bulletin board posting, Sketch Comedians Wanted for Something Completely Different. And when I played him Hallelujah  for  the first timethe two of us sitting Indian-style on my dorm room floorthe tears streamed down his face onto the lumpy dun carpet.
Years later, when Nonesuch finally called with the contract offer, Greg told me he owed it all to me. If I hadnt introduced him to Jeff Buckley that night, he wouldve never known to write his own songs. If I hadnt been there to lead the charge, to grab him by the scruff   of the neck, and say, I know this is what God wants for us, he wouldve never come to New York. The Kennedy Center thing was a real boost for a young artist, but Gregs success and the part I played in itthats what Ill always be most proud of.

Mike nodded every so often, but it was hard to read him. He couldve been hanging on my every word or weighing his dinner options.
So you and Greg were tight from the start, he said. Where does Cara come in?


I smiled, the way only the thought of Cara can make me smile. Cara? Cara doesnt come in, man. Shes the through line.
Mike opened his mouth, but before he could ask for an explana- tion, inspiration struck. As they often do, the right words just came to me: Greg and I were the stars of our little universe, okay? Cara was the sky.

Greg and I majored in Divinity, took Introduction to Pastoral Ministry together our second semester. Cara was the only girl in our section. Of course, we both noticed her severe beauty: long, straight hair; sharp nose and chin; delicate, ballet-slippered foot tapping under her desk, like an urgent telegraph. I also noticed  her noticing Greg. How could she not? The guy was six feet tall, captain of the swim team, jaw like Batman; he played guitar on the quad and held his sides when he laughed. I saw from the begin- ning how it would play out. I swear I even saw myself presiding at their wedding. And I was never once competitive or even jealous, because I knew I would be her best friend, just as I was Gregs, and the intimacy among the three of us would be absolute. That was Gods plan for us.
She was always the practical one. In that first class together, while Greg and I debated the finer points of theology, challenging our pro- fessor on predestination and biblical literalism, she asked questions: How does a ministry support itself? Do pastors get 401ks? A year later, when Greg and I had the shared revelation that our true calling was art, she switched majors without thinking twice, graduated with a degree in business administration. I teased her, of course, called her Business in the Front, Business in the Back, but she was unflap- pable. Someones got to have their feet on the ground, she said. God knows you boys dont.
She booked Greg gigs around campus and even a few engagements at townie bars, unheard of at the time. For me, she found rehearsal space, wrangled budget-conscious alternatives to my grandiose set and costume designs. When my first student play went up, she lorded over the till, refused to let us blow  the takeall forty-five  dollars  of iton a celebratory keg. I knew then, no matter who I ended up


sharing a bed or a name with, Id never be more cared for. Id never feel more loved.
Our senior year, when I found out Id won the Kennedy Center award, she was the first one I told. The play was about a minister who defends a painter accused of making sacrilegious art. Id been reading about the showdown between Giuliani and the Brooklyn Museum, saw the potential there. Sure enough, there was interest in New York. Id known for a year the city was our next move, but I also knew Id need Caras help convincing Greg.
Hed spent the previous summer gigging around Ohio, winning converts in Cincinnati, Columbus, Cleveland. Somewhere along the way, hed found his voice. The crowds in those coffee shops and base- ment clubs must have felt like they were at the Gaslight in 62 seeing  a kid named Dylan for the first time, only Greg could sing like an angel and work a room like Sinatra at the Sands. Sometimes the stories he tolddead-on impressions of his brothers, Billy Graham, the Irish setter he had as a kidwent on longer than the songs, which admit- tedly were still working themselves out. Seriously, if you didnt get to see him live, you really missed something. Seems like the record com- pany finds a new Jeff Buckley concert in the archives every few months. The only tape of Greg singing live is in a shoebox in my closet.
The point is Greg was happy with the way things were going. The buzz was building; the tour he had planned for the summer after graduation would take him as far as Chicago. He could be an artist and still be close to home. Cara was thinking about a house with a yard, trading stocks on the Internet, a kid bobbing on her knee. But all I had to say was, You know hes too good to stay. She let it go with a sigh.
Gods plan? she said.
I took her hand. No doubt.
A few days after we made the decision, the two of them gave me    a card with a picture Greg had drawn: three hands clasped together. Inside, Cara had written in her precise hand, Will you  marry us? I still have it in the same shoebox with the tape of Greg performing. By then, I was an ordained minister. Greg hadnt bothered taking the licensing exam. He figured, Im an artist now, whats the point? I was


just as committed to writing as he was to music, but remember, Id seen this mument coming. Besides, I figured being a man of the cloth would set me apart once we got to the godless cesspool of New York. I performed the ceremony in the backyard of his parents house.
Cara walked down the aisle barefoot in a simple white slip dress. Greg and I received her, he in a rented tux, me in the most formal of my Chinese suits. I spoke of what it means to have a path in life, of how important it is to have companions walking that path alongside you, and how blessed I felt to be walking with Greg and with Cara on the same path, together. They kissed, and then Greg sang a song hed written just the day before that brought all of us to tears. After the picnic-style dinner, he and I dusted off some of our freshman-year sketch comedy repertoire. Ive got to say, we killed.
Cara and I made the move in June. The plan was to live together until Greg joined us in Septemberhe had to go through with the tourand then Id find my own place. I was living off my Kennedy Center prize, taking meetings with agents and producers. I tried to convince Cara to take it easy for a while, explore the city with me, but being Cara, she signed up with a temp agency right away. Wed reconvene in the evenings in our fourth-floor walk-up. No furniture, so wed lie side by side on the floor, just like we did at Wilmott, drink wine out of pint glasses, talk about our days, about Greg.

Was it different when it was just the two of you? Easy, I told myself. Hes a reporter. He has to ask.
Man, everything was different. I was a professional writer. Me,   a preachers son from Nowhere, Ohio. Living above a lesbian biker club. Cara was the only part of my life that wasnt different.
Mike obliged me with a half-smile. I just find it amazing. Gregs off doing his thing while his bride and his best friend are living this exciting new life together. And hes cool with it?
Greg was an amazing guy, I said. Isnt that the whole point of this?
Mike broke eye contact to look out at the river behind me. I could almost hear the machinery in his skull humming as it generated cyni- cal thoughts.


I talked to Greg on the phone every day, I said. I could hear in his voice how badly he wanted to be here.
Mike shifted his gaze back to me. And you?
I stared back as hard as I could. If Id known how little time we had, I wouldve told him to drop everything. I wouldve told him not to stop for red lights.
That last bit was a spin on an old Aaron Sorkin line. You know what they say: good writers borrow, the great ones steal. But the heat I put behind it was all mine.
Mike looked a little crumpled, like a balloon slowly losing air. A soft click broke the silence between us: the tape in his recorder hit- ting the end of Side A.
How long was Greg here before he died?
I wanted to tell him to flip the tape first, but I pushed the thought out of my mind. An audience is like a wild animala muments hesi- tation, and youre dead.
Ten months, I said. But we packed ten lifetimes into them.

It took me a while to find my own place, so we all crammed in to- gether for a few weeks. Even once I moved out, I ended up crashing with them half the time anyway. It was the three of us again, the plan was finally coming together, and it was both exactly and not at all like Id imagined it.
The friendship was strong as ever. Greg and I still cracked each other up with our Cockney accents and inside jokes. Cara still rolled her eyes. We still stayed up all night, playing each other music, won- dering out loud why theres so much great rock and roll made by Christians but no great Christian rock. Cara still kept us honest and on task, saying, If you boys are just going to jerk each other off, we couldve stayed in Ohio.
The part that didnt live up to my expectations was the work. No, not the workGreg and I were both coming into our own as artists, discovering what we could really do, realizing that God had given us the green light. The problem was the city. The city didnt care. My play went up in a decent-sized black box off Broadway, but no one reviewed it. Greg was getting gigs, even an industry showcase, but his


style wasnt connecting with the skinny-jeans-and-mullets crowd. He was too openhearted to play it cool.
After a couple of months, he started pining for his fan base back home. They want to like you. Here, they want to hate you. I was  frustrated, too, but I wouldnt give in to homesickness. Did he think we werent going to struggle? He knew Proverbs as well as I did. By long suffering is a prince persuaded. He answered me with, Like vinegar on a wound is one who sings songs to a troubled heart. I asked him if Cara was putting pressure on him, and he said no. I told him if we left without making a name for ourselves wed always feel small-time. He said he wasnt sure he minded being small-time. I begged him to give it a year. He agreed.
Of course, no one has a more twisted sense of humor than God.   I shouldve known that when the big  break  came  it  would  come for Mr. I Dont Mind Being Small-Time. One  night, after opening for an established local act, Greg left the club to find David Byrne waiting for him on the street. Byrne said hed never seen anything quite like Greg before; the closest was this indigenous singer in Peru who mixed plaintive ballads with traditional storytelling. He asked to hear Gregs demo, and when Greg said he didnt have one, he of- fered up his home studio. A month later the brass at Nonesuch were drooling over the tape. A month after that, Gregs voice was purling through a Volkswagen adyou know, the one with the good-look- ing guy and the good-looking girl racing up opposite sides of a hill in matching Rabbits. They both stop on a dime when they reach the summit, the grilles of the cars almost touching, as if theyre about to go at it like . . . well, rabbits. Greg sounds amused by the whole thing, practically sighing, See you there, see you there, with the red leaves in your hair.
When I saw that commercial, Ill admit, I was finally jealous of Greg. A singer-songwriter can just drag his guitar from joint to joint until David Byrne steps out of the woodwork to be his guardian angel. A playwright needs actors and directors and stagehands and technicians. Id decided Id have to form my own company if I was going to get anything done, but the prize money was dwindling, and I didnt have any upcoming commitments to entice the right people,


the ones who could give my words  the treatment they deserved. I  felt myself becoming a guy whod done something once, while Greg was striding from strength to strength, unassuming as ever. It had all happened too fast. At my weakest, I wondered if I shouldve let him go back to Ohio, if it wouldve made things easier for me.
God took care of that nonsense, too. The day of Gregs first re- cording session for his debut album, the headaches started. By the end of the month, the tumor had been diagnosed, and Id never be jealous of my friend again. I knew if I did nothing else in my life but help him through his trial, keep his spirits up so he could finish the album and find peace, Id have fulfilled my purpose.
Right before all this happened, Cara got a full-time job with one of the companies she temped for. If it wasnt for her health plan, Greg wouldnt even have gone to the doctor for his headaches. Eventually, he wouldve collapsed, and even if wed gotten him to the hospital in time, we wouldnt have been able to afford treatment.
As Greg got sicker, Cara wanted to quit so she could take care of him. But she couldnt lose the insurance. So I took care of him while she worked. I slung his arm over my shoulder and helped him down the four flights from his apartment to the street. In the studio, I held him upright while he sang, even though he was a foot taller than me. During those final sessions, he was determined to manage the pain and pour every last drop of himself into the songs. Even when he went blind in his left eye, his right eye just shined brighter, as long as the tape was rolling and he was making his music. At the end of the day, the light would go out and hed collapse with exhaustion. I spent the last of my money on cabs to take us home from the studio. After Greg checked into the hospital for good, Cara and I would stay with him most nights, sleeping in chairs. Once I woke up to the sound of her choking on her own tears. Before I was even fully con-
scious, Id reached over and laid my hand on hers.
Between sobs, she whispered, How could God do this? Do you think God gives people cancer? I asked.
Do you hear him screaming? she said. Hes begging for mercy.
Why wont God show him mercy?
I watched her chin tremblethe chin Id always thought of as im-


periousand raised my hand to cup it. He did, I said, turning her face toward mine. He gave him you.
Her lips parted for a mument, then closed again: the saddest smile Id ever see.
And you, she said. I wiped away a tear with my thumb.

Afternoon had faded into evening. Id already blown off my improv class. I still had my key to the walk-up, so I figured Id wait for Cara to come home from work. I sat on the futon where Id slept so many nights, looking through the doorless doorway at the cramped bed- room. The bed was unmade, the sheets snarled and kicked aside. I thought about how much better I liked this place when there was no furniture in it, when Cara and I slept on an air mattress on the floor. When the door opened, I was staring at a framed photo of Greg, Cara, and me back at Wilmott, Cara smiling properly at the camera, while Greg and I mug on either side of her. Im fingering my chin like a philosopher lost in thought, Greg raising his eyebrow like its
Santori Time.
Who are those people? I heard Cara say over my shoulder.
I set the picture aside. Just a bunch of kids with a crazy dream. I got what I wanted: the Cara eye-roll. She dropped her company tote bag on the floor. Sorry I didnt go to that thing last night. I
just . . . well, I didnt want to, to be honest.
I met a reporter today, I said. To talk about Greg.
Cara glanced at me, then ducked her head into the fridge. So you got what you wanted then. Beer?
He wants to talk to you.
Cara didnt answer. She was searching the one drawer in her kitch- enette for a bottle opener.
We can do it together, I said.
Did you tell him I was too fragile to do it myself?
I moved the picture so she could sit beside me. No. I told him you might not want to talk, but he said the piece needs your perspective. She sat on the coffee table facing me. The three of us had found it on the sidewalk and hauled it up the stairs together. My perspective. Its the Times, Cara. Gregs going to be in the New York Times.


She looked at me blankly, took a sip of her beer. And your project?
Is your project going to be in the Times, too?
My project? But I knew what she meant. Id told her I was work- ing on a new play, a musical actually. I was writing it around Gregs songs. After he died, I was paralyzed for a time. But at the end of the day, I was still a writer, and there was only one way I knew to deal with the grief. The show would be a celebration of his music and his life, his devotion to his art, his faith, his friends. I told Cara it was going to be bigger than Spring Awakening.
I reached out to take Caras hand. She let me, but there was no response to my touch.
Hey, I said. I didnt say anything about the project. Come on. She cocked her head to the side as if she needed to see me from a different angle. You didnt tell him you and Greg started working
on it together before he died?
I pulled my hand back. Hell no. Cara, look at me.
She was already looking straight at me. Still, I felt the need to say it again: Look at me. I didnt say that. I promise you I wouldnt say that.
Cara put her beer down between her slender thighs and sighed through her perfect nose. Good. Its better if I say it.
I wanted to answer her, but something happened to me then, something Id never experienced before: the words didnt come.
Ill say you suggested it to keep his spirits up, Cara said. He always felt better when he was working.
Cara . . . 
Ill say it was all he could talk about. He thought of himself as just a guy with a guitar, but you, you were going to be the poet laure- ate of our generation.
My tongue felt dense in my mouth. Did he say that?
I thought the smile shed given me at the hospital that night was the saddest Id ever see, but I was wrong. I closed my eyes.
He loved you, Cara said. And I love you. So Im  going  to  do this interview for you. But after that, Im going home. I cant be here anymore. Do you understand?
I couldve gotten on my knees and begged her to stay. I couldve


said, I dont  know  if I can make  it  in this city without  you,  and I wouldve been telling the truth. Then  again, I  couldve  said, Ill go with you. Forget the Times, forget Broadway. Well go home together. Have an Irish setter and a boy named Greg. You can trade stock on the Internet, and Ill spend my life raking the red leaves in the yard.
But I didnt say any of that. God has a plan for each of us. I know it. And I knew this was all part of his plan for me. So I just said, Whatever you want. Cara leaned over and kissed me on the fore- head. Then she told me she was tired.
As I walked down the stairs, I recalled what it was like having to hold Greg steady as we negotiated those four flights, one step at a time. It made me feel light, unburdened. I took my phone out of the pocket of my vest and started scrolling through my address book, all the poets and painters and dancers Id met since I came to the city. I wondered where everyone was tonight.


Crowe Street is quiet at night. Murphy likes it this way, though most nights he has trouble sleeping. For weeks he hasnt gotten a good nights rest, averaging four or five hours each night, sometimes less. He attributes his restlessness to his worries about his job at Granaby Youth Corrections. At thirty-six, hes the youngest administrator since the facility was built in the early nineties, but in truth he hates it. He wants to believe in the kindness of strangers, the fierce pos- sibilities of hope, the beauty of color. Some nights after work he sits on the back porch and watches fireflies and moths while his son Ste- phen plays with their dog, Rufus. Lately he has to supervise Stephen outside. Stephen is six, and for several weeks hes been trying to hurt the dogpoking him with a  stick, pulling his tail, throwing rocks at him. Last month Murphy talked to his wife Kate about counsel- ing, but neither of them got around to calling anyone. Murphys so beaten down by work lately he cant concentrate on anything.
Much of what he describes about his work to Kate is corroborated by the younger guys from his neighborhood whove been through the system and talk openly about being locked up when they were minors. Outside the Portuguese market down the street, Murphy  listens to their stories and pretends to be interested. In the apartment building next door, one of the upstairs tenants, Jack, has Monday Night Football parties that Murphys never been invited to. Jack,


whos slightly dyspneic and overweight, talks about his life as a delin- quent, all the times he smoked hydroponic pot with his friends in a dim basement while listening to Janes Addiction and eating Nutter Butters. When Jack was seventeen he got drunk and stole a car from the neighborhood, put it through the window of a Repo Records,  and then got out and asked if they had anything by the Del Fuegos. But thats all history, he tells Murphy. Another tenant, a thirty- four-year-old construction worker named Lyle, says he was caught trying to steal a rosewood-handled boot knife from an estate sale. Ever since, his father refers to him as slightly worse than useless.
About once a week Kate sends Murphy to the Portuguese market even though she knows Murphy cant stand the food. Codfish, pick- led onions, red peppers, chourico, pork pudding, cacoula, and so on. Murphy cant stand any of it. On nights she cooks that stuff he pur- posefully works late, then stops by Anchor Toms on his way home  for a slice of pizza or a bowl of chowder to go. But the truth is that Murphy never minds going to the market because he has a small crush on the woman who works there. Her name is Mina; shes divorced and dark and in her thirties. Murphy can tell she has a good bullshit antenna, so he hasnt even attempted to flirt with her. She shrugs off the guys who try, or else tells them straight, Sorry, not interested. Murphy has never once seen her smile. The way her mouth droops on one side is basically the way she looks all the time, but somehow he finds this sexy. He imagines sleeping with her and searching her face. Her expression, her mouth, the whole time looking like shes just been handed a used sock.
Tonight, yet again, he is thinking about her as he lies in bed next to Kate. Do we need anything from the market? he asks quietly in the dark. I was just thinking.
What? Its midnight.
I meant for tomorrow. I could dash over there real quick. Stop talking.
Just trying to help out. No.
He loves Kate absurdly. He loves that shes neurotic, afraid of spi- ders and planes, worried about catching colds or a sore throat. Before


they married, he sometimes playfully gave her Indian rub-burns on her arms while they watched Letterman at her apartment in West Haven. She grew up with three older brothers, so she didnt mind playing rough. In the beginning they were spontaneous; he often took her against the wall in a sort of arabesque position, but that was several years ago. They married just out of college. He was working as a program coordinator in a small juvenile detention center. Now all he thinks about is quitting his job or fucking some stranger, like Mina from the market.
Although, more and more frequently, he is aware of how incredibly lucky he is. He reminds himself of this. Stephen is a joy regardless of his recent behavior with Rufus. Sometimes at night they gather in the living room and play board games or draw pictures. On Sundays, Murphy helps Kate with yard work. When the weather is nice they take walks through the neighborhood, Stephen riding his bike in front of them. Were blessed, Kate said one Christmas Eve when Stephen was a baby. We have to remember how blessed we are.
Murphy sits up in bed and turns on the TV, mutes the sound, finds a nature program on cable. A magnified butterfly sits on a leaf. The butterfly materializes, pulsing, then flutters away.

Murphys boss, Hank Drucker, says the city doesnt  like runaways  or delinquents. Hank, whos been a detention director for twenty- five years, is overweight and asthmatic and drinks heavily. He spends most of the day in his office, sucking on his inhaler and leaving Murphy to supervise the staff and handle the residents. For as long as Murphys known him, Hanks been a man who speaks his mind. I need someone to put out fires, he told Murphy when he hired   him several years ago. He pumped his inhaler in his mouth and sat back in his swivel chair. The juveniles at Granaby are runaways and criminals. Some get kicked out of youth shelters for getting high or stealing from staff. Others get picked up by the police and brought in. Ill worry about the court documents and paperwork. I need you out there on the floor, putting out fires.
For the past fifteen years, Murphy has seen these kids come in and out of juvenile detention. Sometimes the court places them in the cus-


tody of social services and they sit in detention and wait to be placed in group homes. Then they run away from the group homes and return to the streets, and the whole cycle starts over again. Murphy is the assistant director and serves as a sort of in-house counselor. The juveniles he talks to during intakes, after theyve changed out of their street clothes and showered and put all their money and jewelry in baggies, after theyve carried their bed sheets and pillows down the hall past the medical supply room to their rooms, they tell him what happens when they return to the streets. They always want to talk their first night. Especially the newcomers. Part of Murphys job is just listening to them. He thinks they see  enough  in six months to provide a lifetime of nightmares. Some of the Hispanics tell him they stand in the alley behind MGs Liquor on Albany Street and see skinheads in leather jackets and camouflage pants walk by and stare at them. The skinheads smoke cigarettes and throw bottles. The skin- heads lean against the fence and piss in the street and yell at them.
Were not scared of them, Paolo says. Ive seen these guys and they dont do anything. Paolo is sixteen and from the north side of Hartford. Hes lived in six different foster homes since he was twelve. His father is part of a large Latin gang and is doing time for posses- sion of firearms and drug trafficking after what the FBI called one of the largest raids since the prohibition era. Paolo tells Murphy about pickpocketing tourists in Boston on the subway T train from Govern- ment Center to Harvard Square. For two months he stole toilet paper every day from Captain Jacks Fish Houses bathroom until the place closed down due to failing health inspections. For a while, before he was picked up and sent to the shelter, he slept wherever he couldin the homes of strange men, under a pavilion in a park on Albany, on the wood floors of abandoned houses. As he talks to Murphy, he looks at the dried blood in his fingernails from scratching the scabs on his scalp. He has lice. Impetigo of the scalp. Tonight the staff will treat his hair with olive oil and a lice comb. Theyve been through this before.
Later in the night, Paolo is upset. His hand is bleeding from punch- ing the concrete wall, and hes threatening to kill himself. Hes made threats like this in the past. After he calms down, two staff members


help him into the medical room and wrap his hand. His fingers are swollen and bloody. Murphy thinks Paolos fingers might be broken, so he and Paolos probation officer, Rob, have to transport him to the hospital. Rob cuffs Paolos hands in front rather than behind his back since his hand is injured, then puts on the ankle restraints.
Always a flight risk, Rob says.
Paolo sits in the backseat with his head down. They drive toward downtown to St. Francis. Been here  before,  Murphy has, but  not  for a long while. They pass liquor stores, beauty parlors, sheet metal wholesalers, old warehouses and apartment buildings. Downtown, Seymour Streets darkness is broken at intervals with the yellow light of apartment windows, the open doors of restaurants and bars. The scent of decay emanates from the parking lot as they help Paolo from the car and walk him into the emergency room. Low priority emer- gency, so they will have to sit and wait as usual. Nobodys really at- tempted suicide at Granaby, but Murphy tells the staff they have to take threats seriously, especially when a kid like Paolo is punching a wall until his hand bleeds.
You need to sit up, Rob says in the waiting room. But Paolo is exhausted, sitting slumped with his head resting against the wall. He cant keep his eyes open. When the nurse takes them to a room, Rob uncuffs him so she can check his pulse and take his blood pressure. She takes his hand and studies it. Can you move your fingers?
Paolo moves his fingers but winces. Theyre pretty swollen, Murphy says.
Paolo sits on the exam table, staring at Robs military-style crew cut. The nurse writes something down on a  clipboard, tells  them the doctor will be in soon and leaves the room. Murphy knew they would be there at least a couple of hours, so he brought along the Courant. He unfolds it and starts on the New York Times crossword but struggles to keep his eyes open.
I could fall asleep right here, he says.
Rob sits next to him and chews on a toothpick.
By the time they return to Granaby its late, after eleven. The grave- yard crew is there, starting laundry. All residents are in bed. Murphy takes Paolo to his room in wing A and logs the prescribed antibiotic


in the medical room. Nothing broken, thankfully. He tells Cliff, the eleven-to-seven supervisor, to have someone from the morning shift go to the pharmacy and fill the antibiotic.
Weve got other problems, Cliff says. Thomas in Wing C.
Murphy can already guess. Thomas, a fourteen-year-old, seriously unstable kid from Allston whos in for rape by instrumentation on his f ive-year-old stepsister. Thomas will possibly be charged as an adult and remain locked up until hes twenty-one unless the long- term treatment is successful and the justice system considers him re- habilitated. These kids, theyre called youthful offenders, which is a polite term for sex offenders. Theyre unlike the others in detention in that most of them are socially inept, immature, obsessive about little things like hiding extra toilet paper in their pillow cases and masturbating two or three times a day in the main bathroom with the door open. Thomas always wants attention. His father is one of those low-grade knuckleheads who wears f lannel shirts and drives a 1993 f irebird and chews Red Man. During weekend visitation, he once told Murphy he drinks Stolichnaya vodka only. Thomas has an unfortunate facial tic that Murphy thinks he exaggerates for atten- tion at certain times throughout the day, like during meals when no talking is the rule. Hes been in detention for more than ninety days while hes waiting to be placed in residential treatment. This week hes in room confinement for making inappropriate remarks about sharpening a broomstick and using it as a weapon on deten- tion officers.
I can already guess, Murphy says.
Sure enough. In Wing C, Murphy opens Thomass door and sees him sitting cross-legged on the floor with his shirt off. His shirt is crumpled on his bed, and feces are smeared on the wall and all over the floor. Feces, everywhere. Murphy radios a staff member to Wing C and Thomas looks up.
Whats wrong with you? Murphy says. Again?
Thomas doesnt say anything. But there is shame, if not embarrass- ment, and Murphy has to remind himself that most of the state cus- tody abused kids like Thomas developed a habit of smearing feces in bed or shitting in their underwear to ward off their predators. These


are the times that test Murphys patience, and residents like Thomas are good at grating on his nerves. Before he started working with de- linquents, Murphy taught ninth-grade civics at a public high school in East Hartford but got fired for cursing at  the students. Murphy, at twenty-four, young and just out of college, still single and staying out late at night, then hungover the next day and trying to deal with hyperactive adolescents with mood swings and hormones. The day he got fired he lost his temper. His students were talking and laugh- ing and being generally disruptive as he stood at the blackboard,  and after several attempts to quiet them, he threw his head back and screamed, Cant you people ever shut the fuck up and listen to me for one goddamn second? He has to remind himself of those days when his job gets stressful, as it does trying to deal with Thomas.
You know the drill, Murphy says.
Thomas gets up and follows Murphy to the closet, where they fill  a mop bucket and get a spray bottle full of cleaner and paper towels. Thomas spends the next thirty minutes cleaning his room and then takes a shower while everyone else in Wing C is trying to sleep. A staff member relieves Murphy so he can go home after such a long day. A twelve-hour day, in fact, and he doesnt get paid overtime. The extra hours accrue as comp time, which means he can at least take off early tomorrow.
Try not to call me at home tonight if theres a problem, Murphy tells Cliff.
Dont call you?
Lets hope for a smooth night. I need sleep.

At the market, Murphy pays for the jar of pumpkin jam on the coun- ter and waits for Mina to say something as she opens the register and hands him his change. He is nervous near her, edgier every time he sees her. She has an insouciant manner about her that makes him burn with anticipation. And yet he will not tell her he finds her at- tractive, he knows this. He doesnt trust himselfhow else but by silence can he hope to keep her a stranger? When he doesnt fill the silence, she does: Sleeping any better? she asks, putting the jar in a little brown paper sack, and he remembers hed told her about his insomnia a couple of weeks ago.


I think about work too much, he says. Oh, so youre one of those people. Pretty much.
I feel sorry for you, she says, and he notices shes joking. Were you a deprived child? No SweeTarts, right? No candy except on holi- days?
She stops at the sight of what has come over him. He feels flushed, nervous. He crosses his arms so that she cant see his wedding ring. On the counter behind her, in fastidiously arranged rows, are stacked cartons of cigarettes, Marlboros and Kools and Camels, and for the first time in four years, since he quit smoking, Murphy feels the ago- nizing craving for a cigarette. What is it about her?
She inhales sharply. Look at you, all embarrassed. No, no, he says. I mean, its work.
Lack of sleep. Especially that.
Have nice dreams, she says, and as he leaves he hates himself.
At home, he no longer feels tired. Why does this happen? He goes to the back porch and tends to the dog. He empties the water bowl, refills it with the water hose. He fills the other bowl with dry dog food. Murphys dog Rufus, a terrier mix he adopted from the shel- ter nine years ago, eats with civility. Murphy scratches Rufus on the scruff of his neck and goes back inside.
Upstairs, Kate is asleep. When he gets into bed, she turns over and asks him how work was.
Fine. We had to take a kid to the hospital. She yawns. Yeah, I thought so.
I wouldve called but I didnt want to wake Stephen. Tonight I caught him hitting Rufus with a broom. Jesus, Murphy says. Why?
He didnt say anything. I took the broom and sent him to his room.
I dont know what to do. I thought about taking him fishing on Saturday.
Kate turns over. That would be good.
Murphy turns on the television, flips through channels. For a while he watches some sort of fishing show on cable. A man in a fish-


ing boat, holding a bass by its open mouth. The man tosses the fish into the water. Murphy leans over to embrace Kate, resting his arm against the sheets. Hey, he whispers.
Tired, Kate says, and yawns.

Mark, a detention officer on the seven-to-three shift, is filling out Intake papers on a resident when Murphy arrives to work. The resi- dent is Eddie, a seventeen-year-old boy whos been to Granaby twice in the last year. Eddies been in juvenile detention centers since he was twelve, when he was caught stealing cold medicine and beer from a Coles pharmacy. For a while he was living off and on with a man he calls his uncle. Eddie has seizures, so the staff has to be careful with him. The seizures are mild. He once told Murphy that his seizures taste like battery acid. He came in several months ago with damp clothes and a fever, burns, and chills, and spent the next day vomiting in his room. Hes the only resident who can beat Murphy in chess.
Today, at rec time after lunch, they play chess in the Day Room. Eddie plays fast, moving his queen out early. Murphy is all defense; before he can make an aggressive move, Eddie puts him in check- mate.
Youre really terrible, Eddie says.
Youve gotten better or Im worse, Murphy says. Play again?
Eddie beats him two more games. Afterward, he tells Murphy  he thinks of his mother often. When Eddie was nine, she died in the hospital. He says he shouldve been with her, that he should be the one who disappeared. For Eddie, everything feels ragged, as if he has left behind a thousand lives who depend on himthe ones he takes care of, the younger boys who are left alone. They creep around the city at night, through winding tunnels, dark streets, sidling upon drunken old men and then rummaging through their wallets, forcing up particle board and removing nails, anything they can f ind and use as weapons if they need to. They arent afraid. They struggle to survive.
Later in the afternoon, outside on the basketball court, Eddie runs for the fence and starts to climb, but two detention officers manage


to pull him down. Hes taken inside and confined to his room. When Granaby was built, Murphys boss, Hank Drucker, wanted the fence fifteen feet high with razor wire at the top. So far no residents have attempted to escape. At staff meetings, Hank is always reading news stories of juveniles escaping from detention centers around the coun- try. Just last month in Gastonia, North Carolina, a juvenile escaped from a detention center and stole a car. Thats why we need five detention officers with the residents whenever theyre outside, Hank tells the staff. I didnt earn my reputation for nothing. I promised safety.
Still, there are those in Red Owl with uncertain fears. There are those who believe the residents will escape. There are those who be- lieve they have unique and elaborate plans of hurting young children. Madeleine Simmons, who lives a mile east of the facility, approached Murphy one morning as he was pumping gas at the 7-Eleven on his way to work: My husband and I took our daughter out of Rose kin- dergarten after a group of those boys started hanging around, she told him.
Sorry to hear that, Murphy said. They didnt run away from Granaby, if thats what you were wondering.
Im not blaming you. Were not saying its your fault. Nobody ran away. Were a lockdown facility.
We picketed when the county was trying to raise the tax to have the place built in the first place, Mrs. Simmons said. We know Judge Arnott and his wife. Just to let you know.
The community hates him. They hate Granabys location on the outskirts of the city, close to new housing. They wanted the facility to be downtown by the Bureau of Juvenile Services and the courthouse. To get through the day, Murphy sometimes has to remind himself that what hes doing is a good thing. He decided on this type of work because he wanted to help troubled kids. He was determined then, just out of college. He used to play basketball and volleyball with the residents. Now its dominoes and chess.
But youre still young, Hank Drucker wheezes. Murphys in Hanks office while Hank sits behind his desk. Hanks swivel chair squeaks every time he moves or laughs. Murphy, you miserable


fucker, youre still in good shape. Look at me, all old and fat. Im from the streets of Houston. I was raised on red meat and grease. I worked my way here by hard work. No college degree. Just plain old hard work. I cant do one goddamn active thing anymore.
You look fine.
Im pushing three hundred, Hank says, leaning way back in his swivel chair. He sucks on his inhaler and pumps it twice. Dont bullshit me. I drink scotch every night. Johnny Red. When do I have time to exercise? All Im saying is get the fuck out there and stay active with the residents. Play ball. Shoot hoops. Dont let yourself turn to shit like I did.
Lately I dont feel like it.
Murphy, you miserable shitspeck, I like you. We need to have drinks sometime. Bernice and I need company. Ever since her hip surgery shes a fucking invalid.
Sure, Ill check with Kate.
Check with your wife, Hank says. He laughs and wheezes. His chair squeaks.
Later, a detention officer radios Murphy that a transport officer is in the carport to take Paolo to court. Murphy helps Paolo clear out his room. Paolo changes back into his own clothes and Murphy walks him down the corridor to meet the juvenile transport officer at the door. The transport officer cuffs and puts ankle restraints on Paolo while Murphy unlocks the doors that lead to the carport outside.
Hope Ill get released, Paolo says.
But Murphy knows it wont happen. Hell be placed in a temporary youth shelter or foster home. Then hell run away and return to the streets until he gets arrested again. The transport officer helps Paolo into his car. From the carport, Murphy sees him sitting in the back- seat with his head down as the car backs out of the garage.

After work, at the market, Murphy buys a jar of green olives, but Mina isnt working. The cashier who rings him up is an older woman with a veiled, dreamy expression, a kind of pout. She has a rocky chin and cheekbones, her bangs gray-blond. Murphys never seen her before. When he asks about Mina, she looks at him.


Im new, she says, but I dont think she works here anymore. She hands Murphy his change.
Thanks, Murphy says, and as he walks out he wonders if Mina quit. The thought that he wont see her again is depressing. Hell no longer have a reason to look forward to going there. On his way to  his car he sees Antonio Perez, who lives in a small house down the street. Antonios oldest son was placed in detention once for shoplift- ing from Repo Records, so Murphy got to know Antonio. Fifteen years ago, Antonio left Queens with his wife and kids and took the train up here to Hartford. He walks with a limp from getting stabbed in the foot with a barbecue brochette by his first wife. We used to drink whiskey, he once told Murphy. Then wed get into bad fights. Crazy whore. She pulled a knife on me once a week.
Tonight, Antonio limps over to Murphy and puts his hand on his shoulder. How are you, my friend? he says.
Just getting off work, Murphy says.
Plumbing problems for me tonight, Antonio says. And my sons sick. I need cough medicine and a plumber. Any help?
Whats wrong with your plumbing?
The faucet makes a noise and spits. I dont know what to do. I cant afford a plumber.
I can have a look, Murphy tells him, and after Antonio buys red peppers and cough medicine inside, Murphy gets into his car and fol- lows him down the street to his house. The neighborhood is rough, cars parked in yards, wood-frame houses with dirty paint. Inside, An- tonios wife Rosa is watching TV in the living room with their kids. Cough medicine and red peppers, Antonio says, handing the
bag to his wife. I brought the miracle man.
Are you a witch doctor or a plumber? she asks Murphy.
Who knows what I am, he says, and Rosa laughs. He follows An- tonio into the kitchen, where Antonio turns on the water. The faucet coughs, then makes a gurgling noise. Water bursts from the spigot.
I have tools, Antonio says.
Wheres the valve? We just need a screwdriver and pliers.
They go downstairs to the cellar. Pipes are vibrating, and they find the valve next to a box meter. Murphy turns the valve left to


turn off the water. On the pliers, theres corrosion between the gear teeth. Murphy blows on it and hits it a couple of times against the floor. They go back upstairs and Murphy disassembles the cold water handle. With the screwdriver he chops at the plaster, then puts ev- erything back together again. Antonio goes downstairs and turns the water back on.
Fixed, Murphy says, turning the faucet on and off.
When Antonio comes back to the kitchen he is overjoyed. You fixed it, saved me money, he says. He invites Murphy to stay for coffee and dessert. Rosa made pie, he says. He gets plates from the cupboard and cuts them both a piece of banana pie. They sit in the kitchen and talk. Antonio tells Murphy hes currently working in a little machine shop downtown making nine bucks an hour. He re- moves screws from a box marked Made in China, counts and cleans the bits and then puts them in new boxes marked Made in the USA and Made in Taiwan.
Machines will count screws, he says, but they cost fifty thou- sand dollars, plus software and maintenance. People are cheaper and I need work.
My job isnt much better, Murphy says, and immediately feels guilty for saying it.
Be thankful its a good job, Antonio says. You do okay, make a decent salary, right? I have four kids and a house payment. He takes a sip of coffee. When Im not worried about money Im happy as  Ive ever been.
Murphy finishes his coffee and sets his cup on the counter. On the way out, in the living room, Antonios son Freddie is standing by the fish aquarium, staring into the glass. Murphy stops and kneels down next to him to look. The filtering system is bubbling, but Murphy cant see any fish. He taps the glass. Anything in there?
Hes in the castle, Freddie says. Hes asleep I think. Papa says hes sick, too.
Is he hungry?
He wont eat. We gave him fish food. You can see it on the rocks. Wake up and eat, Murphy says, tapping the glass. Its too dark to see anything in the castle. Freddie puts both hands on the glass. He


coughs, stares into the glass with his mouth open. Murphy can hear the rattle in his chest as he breathes.

Back at home, Murphy goes into Stephens room and checks on him. Stephen is asleep, curled up under the covers. Murphy can see his face in the dim light from the nightlight beside his bed. He closes the door lightly, then goes into the kitchen and fills a glass of water in the sink. Kate is standing in the doorway in her pajamas.
Antonio needed me to fix his faucet, Murphy says. She looks at him. Seriously?
I fixed it, he says. He takes a last drink of water and sets the glass down on the counter. That Portuguese market, he says. I hate going in that place. Theres a woman who works there.
I know, Kate says. Youve already told me that. She walks down the hall to the bedroom. Murphy pours himself a cup of coffee and sits at the kitchen table. He hasnt slept well in months. Tonight will be no different.


I didnt even want to go to the graveyard, but Ruby told me I had     to. She was giving my uncle Stanley hell about it for weeks, until he finally said: Oh shit, Mother. That old road up there is rough as hell. What are we going to do if I get my truck stuck up? My uncle Stanley just lived down the road, so he was always stuck with taking us places.
But she kept going on and on about it, saying: Oh Lordy, Id like to go to the cemetery. I dont know when Ill get back up there.
She told us there was a grave up there she wanted to put flowers on. There was a grave up there she needed to see before she died.

My uncle Stanley finally gave in. He picked up some plastic flowers from the dollar store and drove her up to the graveyard in his truck. He drove down into Prince and we listened to the radio99.5 The Big Dawg in country. Lord have mercy, babys got her blue jeans on. We drove through the places where Ruby had given birth to babies in shacks that no longer stood, and where my grandfather sold moon- shine. We gunned it up Backus Mountain with my uncle Nathan, sitting in the back of the truck trying to hang on with his palsy legs.
Then we finally pulled up the hill and into the Goddard graveyard.
Stanley stopped the truck, and on top of the cow-paddy hill we  got out.


He said: Damn, its bad enough being buried up here, let alone having to come up here when youre still alive.
But my grandma wouldnt listen to him and started walking through the grass. I remembered to watch my step because my uncle Larry stepped in cow shit one time up here when he was wearing flip-flops.
I told Ruby I didnt like graveyards. She told me it didnt matter.
Even though I was only fourteen years old it was no telling when the angel of death might come to get my ass.
I stepped over a big fossilized cow paddy and then I stepped over another as Uncle Nathan laughed at us from the truck.
Earlier that day she fed me peanut butter fudge she made and told me: Nothing lasts.
Now we walked past the graves of all the people she knew.
There was Grandmummy Goddard and Daddy Goddard and Great Grandmummy Goddard and Virginia Goddard.
And there was her aunt Mag Goddard who starved herself to death. Ruby stood in front of the grave and said, No one knows why. She just locked herself in her room and starved herself to death.
Then there were other graves and she started walking through them. She said: I dont think theyve been mowing it very nice out here. Then she stopped in front of one.
I asked her if it was her mother.
And Grandma said, Yeah, thats mummy. The day of the funeral they tried putting her in the ground facing the west. I just hollered and carried on cause she was facing the wrong way for the resurrection.
Then she was quiet and smiled a gummy grin. Then she walked on.
Oh, look at all the little graves, she said, walking past the grave of her uncle.
She turned to it and said, They had to bury him on his stomach. He always said he never could sleep on his back. So he had them bury him on his stomach.
Then she said she never could sleep on her back either. She had me pull away some tall grass from the graves.
She said that it seemed like all there was to do anymore was die.


Thats all people did in this day and age. She said she couldnt even get the ambulance to pick her up anymore when she needed them.  Of course, I knew that they stopped coming because she called every day claiming she was dying. When they got her into the ambulance, it seemed like she was always feeling better and just needed them to just take her down to Rogers and get a gallon of milk. Finally one of the ambulance people told her: Now, Miss Ruby, you call us when youre having an emergency, not just when Nathan runs out of 7-Up. The taxpayers cant be paying for your trips to get Nathans 7-Up.
But I didnt say anything about it. She walked away from the graves and I noticed all the tiny graves beside her mothers grave. There was a grave here and then there was a grave therethe stones all broken off and covered up by the grass.
Whose graves are these? I asked and then I wondered: Why all these little graves?
I knew the answer. They were baby graves.
I walked away, looking at the end where Ruby was.
And I thought about her own mother losing baby after baby after baby after baby after baby and still going onsurrounded by the graves of sons and daughters, brothers and sisters who never were. They were in this groundall this great big lump of flesh we call Earth.
I had even looked in the back of Rubys mothers Bible with all of  it written in the back. There was a date and thenbaby died. There was a date and thenbaby died. There was a date and thengirl baby died.
So I said, You want me to put the flowers down here? Are these the graves you wanted to see?
But Grandma just shook her head.
She pointed to a couple of graves at the edge of the mountain and said, Thats where I want to put them.
THANK GOD.
Ruby moved her walker and started moving closer to the graves, past the grave of her own little baby who died, and then past her hus- band, my grandfather Elgie, who died of his fifth heart attack when I was three.
I heard my uncle Stanley from far over at the edge of the field say:


Daddy would have shit himself if he knew you put him up here with all these goddamn Goddards.
Ruby got mean and said: Well, I figured I wanted him where I wanted him. And I put him where I put him.
She hobbled along some more and I walked behind her.
She said: This is the grave I wanted to see. This is the grave.  I asked: Whose grave is it?
I walked in front of the stone and I saw
 IT WAS HER GRAVE.
It was the grave of

Ruby Irene McClanahan
Born 1917. died . . .

. . . and then there was a blank spacethe space where they would put the date of her death.
She touched the shiny stone and explained how Wallace and Wal- lace gave her a really good deal on the tombstone. She told me I should start saving. It was a good investment.
So Grandma pointed to the grave and finally told me to put the flowers down. And thats just what I did. I put the flowers down on my grandmothers grave. Then she reached into her purse and pulled out a camera.
She said: Well, come on now, Todd. You want to have your pic- tures taken by Grandmas grave? I told her for the thousandth time. My names not Todd, Grandma. My names Scott.
My uncle Stanley shouted at her: Ah hell, Mother. Just leave him alone. He doesnt want to touch your grave.
Then she started in on my uncle Nathan, who was still sitting in the back of the truck. Hey, Nathan. You want to come and sit in front of Mothers grave? Its a pretty thing.
Nathan just sat in the back of the truck and shook his head like: Fuck no.
I finally gave in and Grandma took my picture next to her grave.
Then she waddled over to the side of the shiny marble tombstone and I took her picture.


I looked through the camera and all I could see was my grandma Ruby standing beside her stone.

Ruby Irene McClanahan
Born 1917. died . . .

and then the blank space.
Here was the date of her birth, and the date of her death, which we didnt know yet, but which we passed each year without knowing.
So I got ready to take the picture and I saw her smile.
I saw the graves filling up all around her and I saw how Grandma would be here beneath it one day and then Nathan and then one day Stanley, and then one day . . . me. So I saw her whisper Oh, Lordy, and claim she was dying like she always did.
I wished we were already back at home so I could eat some more peanut butter fudge. Nothing lasts.
I snapped the picture and it was like she was already gone.
It was like I saw that she was dying right thenreal slowand she knew the secret sound. Its a sound that all of us hear. Its a sound that sounds like this. Tick. Tick. Tick.
But there is a way to stop it. I promise you there is a way to stop it.
We can devote our hearts to its opposition.
So I ask you now. Will you? Will you devote your heart to its op- position?




22.
Head Down, Palm Up
by Mitchell S. Jackson


Its hard to see Unc in the shade, with his being the same shade as the shade, but you can always depend to watch his mouth, to track that gold tooth, a glinting last to last extravagance. Its position, not possession, Unc says. Not possession, but position, he says, and swanks into view.
Unc throws contemplative eyes to the sky. Theyre the familial bug eyes, impressive eyes, so big he might see the future, or maybe even another dimension.
The man motions me closer, flaunting the only ring he wears probably his only ring left to weara pinky joint set with an ambit of murky diamonds, and warns we cant let this highgrade reach the wrong ears. Then he pauses for whats likely the sake of suspense, pauses, and says, Youve got to have tools g o t d a M n y o U M e, meaning your rides, your crib, your clothes, your gold, youve got to, but all you gots a molehill without a mouthpiece. He points at his cracked lips, opened with a sliver of space between them, a pipe- smokers lips, forever scorched. And those gorilla moves, he says, i S w e a r F o g o d try em and see dont they get you nothin less than more of what you never wanted. That gorilla aint bout nothin, he says. A smart one comes from here, he says, and touches his temple, never from here, he says. Unc assumes a southpaws stance, shakes miniature fists with abnormally big unbruised knuckles, then


switches to orthodox and whispers g o t d a M n y o U M e again for God only knows.
Okay, now is as good a time as any to ask, good people, if youd please, please, preempt the hatetrocity. Hes my Unc, all right. My real blood relative.
Say, Nephew, Unc says. This how you play it. Soon as you knock one, you keep your head down and palm up. Head down. Palm up, he says again, assuming the pose. He stands a while after, a Buddhist maybe, lanky limbs hanging, lank neck sprouting out of his weath- ered silk shirt, double-creased slacks, secondhand gators spraddled, big-knuckled babyish hands unfurled to show nails long enough to dredge coke, sharp enough to cut steak.
To be true, Unc is sympathetic almost with what the years have done to him, with what hes done to himself over the years, though with the way he yearns he might make more  years than us all, be the only one alive the next coming, which is unsuspecting as shit, considering advice youd call unholy. Or might couldnt. Dont turn down nothin but your collar, he advises, which helped him become the first and penultimate around our way to hustle a plane, though he now borrows hubcaps forever, hawks scrapmetal for rent, and sends the mother of his youngest to a strip where the going rate is less than youd drop on prime sirloin.
Unc says i S w e a r F o g o d again for who knows why.
And people, you can say or think what you will, but my Unc might not be, matterfact most likely isnt, one of those old heads you can pay no nevermind without it costing.
Your rides, he says. Hellified mouthpiece or not, just you try to knock one in a bucket. Just you try to knock one worth a damn with- out a coupla rides from the year of and at least one American-made manufactured when times was good.
Unc says his bottom leaving tripped a weak run. But thats how   it goes, he says. One minute youre up and the nextwell, you know. He pitches his formidable bug eyes at me, eyes that cant anymore see past his past. He hops on a bench, plants a second- hand gator on the seat and leaves another hovering. He rubs his puny hands over a head of semireceding stubble, and says that normally the


high-grade is sold not told, but since Im family and all, hell accept an I.O.U. and a pack of menthols. He laughs and frisks the capacious pockets of his double-creased slacks, pockets once laden with down payment enough for anything, but now most often filled with less than, with atoms, straight zeroth!
Position not possession, he says again, and warns never capitu- late in so many words. My bad, I mean in so many words, the man says it.

Thats Unc. Now me.
My girls so bad, so bad, that to lay sight on her is as if accepting    a wound. In here, among these strobes and kaleidoscopes of color, the early evening crowd can see what I see and I see them willfully, achingly, damn near greedily receiving hurt from her. Unc asks me to point her out and when I show him he says, Now that, that i S w e a r F o g o d, is a goldmine! I say, in so many words, that I dont have the heart to ask, much less convince her. I tell him about what I feel and so on and he says that not all of them is meant, but the ones that is you cant keep from sending themselves. Nephew, Unc says, its either in they nature or it aint.
My girls a spectacle up there, syncopating and twirling and shim- mying and stomping in heels tall enough to fall from and die, a sema- phore for the sound. We sit tables awayhow could I do anything but sit tables away?while my girl dances a song, a song, a song. I watch her step down and hear the deejay ask us to give her a hand, calling her by the name shes named herself for here.
The crowd claps. Then stops all abrupt-like. The deejay tells us to hold tight for a quick intermission, and meantime my girl sends me that smile of hers thats a constellation of white and leads one of the harmed to a section reserved for special attention.
What I dont tell Unc is, Ive accepted so many wounds from her I might be experiencing an afterlife. Then again, I might not be marred enough for a rebirth.
As I was saying, my bad, I mean as I was about to say, my Unc is vivid under the lights. His silk shirt is iridescent in HD! And you


should see the grays glowing in his coveted stubble. I buy the man a double shot of top-shelf and watch him sip with a snort-length pinkie awry.
He says, You got to have a name, g o t d a M n y o U M e. Cause aint shit else more important. He offers up choices, Broadway or Bootleg or America or Famous or Slick. He says that he knew some- one successful named Social. Tells me that I can name myself Super anything except Man. And be careful with those Prettys too, he says. Pretty Tony, Pretty Ricky. Its been enough already with them ones named Pretty. Unc warns when Im ready, really ready, Ive got to choose. Choose maybe Maverick or Sir or Hero or Hype or Juice or Slim or Quick or Charm. He says if I want to go for color Ive got Black or Red. But since you brownskinned, Unc says, thou shalt not.
Unc waves his dinged-up diminutive fistsfists so small they might be the Antichristback and forth and makes exclamations out whats borderline unmentionable. Those hands of his about the size mine were when Unc was bulletproof, faster than you name it. Before in ways that matter most to me, he couldnt measure upor wouldnt, previous to it being hard for me to trust a man who talks with that much flourish.
You listenin? he says. Maybe, I say.
So now I guess you some kind of comedian, he says. Well, all jokes aside, Nephew, scratch those gangster names too. He says Jynx and Pistol and Stitches and Killer are all absolutely out of the ques- tion. He says to me for me to be leery of naming myself little any-  thing, and thats ditto for small animals. And somethin else, the man says, gesturing again with those timid-ass fists, a good name cant be bout surprisin them with some shit they aint expected.
Sounds good, I say, but tell me what it is for real.
What it is, is whats at stake, Nephew, he says. i B U l l S h i t y o U n o t, its always bout whats at stake.
And whats that?
The question is what it aint? Unc says. What the hell aint it? Unc serves more choices, Ten Toes or Dollar or Fly Guy or Champ.


He sweeps his collar for God knows why and reminds me that with- out a name I aint certified. But when you claim one, he says, and downs the last of his top-shelf, the world knows you are not to be fucked with.
My girl dazzles over and sits herself near us and swipes at strands of silky weave stuck to her face from sweat. I watch Unc eye her and see he isnt accepting any wounds but he also isnt compelled to look away. I touch her wristabout the most I ever do in this placeand she leaves it still. This my uncle, I say, and ask how her nights going.
Its goin, she says, fixes her top, exhales what could be her soul. She says to Unc that shes heard so much, which, o n e v e r y t h i n g i l o v e, isnt the least bit a lie.
How you diggin it here? says Unc to my girl.   I got a feelin, she says, this is not to be dug.
Believe, Baby Doll, Unc says, if its anybody know that, its me.
Unc makes his remarkable front tooth something to behold and prospects around before visiting a gaze on my sweet thing.
The two of them carry on until the music is too much anymore to be heard without screaming. My girl gets up, kisses my cheekmore than she usually does in this placeand virtually levitates toward the exit. She comes to rest right before she reaches the threshold and gifts me a smile with just those eyes.
Trust, that aint one to send, Unc says. Not when she looks at you like that.
I want to ask Unc if hes absolutely, positively, undoubtedly, irrev ocably sure, but all I manage is some predictably silly-ass hesitation.
Say, Nephew, he says, this uncle of yours aint gone hype you  on no half-ass truths. What I tell you bout this here is the best of whats best.
Another girl comes in. Astonishing as mine? Yeah, fuckin right. This girl, shes holocaust-thin with a worn face and mottled legs, and stutters around in a sequined two-piece with her unpolished toes pitched over the ledge of low-heeled sandals. Unc  glides his chair out from the table, says about her before we leave that even an old pro such as hisself would be hard-pressed. Be lucky to check a tank


of gas outta that one, he says, blows on his diamond-spec ring real dramatic, and buffs it on his wrinkled slacks.

Next thing, were in Uncs ride from a year other than the year of, from the past thats kept him captive, a joint he keeps spotless, fra- grant with evergreen, with its leather seats and dashboard glazed.
No lies, when he fires the engine, it sounds like breath. Ready? he says.
For  what? I say.
He crafts an eyebrow into a half moon and says remember the rules, position, palms, collar.
I tell him in my own way that Im not so sure if I got what it takes, if Ive been blessed or cursed with heart, and so on.
Unc says, Listen g o t d a M n y o U M e, you got to be aggressive bout this bread and meat.
But? I say.
But me-ass, Nephew, he says. Were born, not made. Me and you, we are born. We aint nothin like these squares.
We listen to tunes while real laid-back-like Unc finger-steers his ride from the year of decades ago to a street thats always featured on the news for something uncouth. He parks blocks back from a busy inter- section, unbuckles himself, gets out, and throws on, with the utmost suavity, a suit coat of innumerable buttons. Unc tells me to come on, assures me all I got to do this time is keep my mouth shut and watch.
Next thing, the man angle-foot struts up to the only live body for  a block in any which way. Nearer, I see shes semi-alive, see shes pale, almost martyrly thin, and needs to comb the tangles out her hyper- colored shrub of synthetic curls.
What it look like? Unc says, looking every which way. Slow, says Uncs throwback broad.
He offers his palm and she spectates it a mument before excavat- ing a meek-ass wad from the plunge of a fossilized lint-bulleted Lycra number.
Who this? she asks.
Hes a small part of your business, Unc says, till I make him more.


Humph, says Uncs throwback minute moneymaker. I watch her jerk her neck and tug the end of her high-ass hem. She even has the gall to totter off proudly.
See, it aint nothin to it, Nephew, Unc says. When its in them, all you got to do is nurture.
He folds her meager salary and, as urbane as ever, slides it into his sport coats inside pocket.

Morning, my sweet thing smells of last nights smoke and something unsacred. I cant explain it. For a time Im content to watch her sleepI do this sometimes, more times than Id admitto count the perfect knobs of her spine where the blanket is strewn off, to watch the tiny heave of her shoulders. Cant help sometimes but wonder how far shes gone. How far theyve gone, or  tried. Hard to  touch her the nights Ive seen her with others, so work nights most nights I dont. We sleep with a healthy space between us. Or maybe, just maybe, this space is sick. Either way, dont bust me down about it please. This practice isnt to be indicted, only conceded as the way of things. And if shes accepted it, then why cant you?
The traffic outside translates to no more than a low hum. The rains metronomic against the gutters. The early light is a big-ass universe in our room, as is this stack of billsall herson the nightstand. To be true, what she brings home confirms Im indefensibly less than. What I cant shake is the sense that I should be slapped or slap my- damn-self for even, however brief, considering my sweet thing. I sit against the headboard and wait, bracing for a righteous blow or light- ning to strike. Who knows how long it takes before she stirs, before my woman rolls over and touches me the way only she can.
You up? I say. I mean coherent. Close, she says.
So, I say. I been thinking. About what? she says.
My Unc, I say. Hes been rappin to me about business.
She says my name as if she wants everyone on earth to hearGod too, and sits up, bare-chested, with those eyes of hers ringed with half moons of old mascara.


You cant be serious, she says. Dont you see that mans a has- been?
Maybe so, I say. Probably so, I say. But that mans my family, I say. And whats worse, a has-been or a never-was?

Nights later, under a gauzy starless sky, listening to more slow tunes, me and Unc cruise, or not so much cruise as patrol, slick streets that seem empty as ever. Unc mutes the music at a stoplight and swoops around to me. He does it real cinematic-like too. My Unc stays on his theatrics. Say, Nephew, you can wait on a life or take a life, he says, but once youre in the lifewell, there it is.
What Im thinking is now, right here, this is the perfect time to speak on it, opportune to mention what I feel. But guess what, I couldnt ever admit to Unc that it isnt the starting, but not know-  ing where and how and if it ends. That whats enough to make me      a punk-ass bronze statue, is the chance of what could be my life be- coming the only life it could have been.
Does that make sense?
Whether it does or doesnt, its no way at all I could summon what Id need to confide; okay, its a slim chance at best, with what Unc knows, with what we knowshit, with what the world knows, of  how the man stepped in and stepped up.
And answer me this peoples: Whats that worth? Or more impor- tant, what isnt it worth?
We bend more corners, reach another part of the city, a block where the traffic crawls and every other streetlight is either quivering or flamed out. Unc parks his aged ride where its easier to see than be seen.
Ready? he says. I guess so, I say.
He says, You see her over there? Go get it,  he says. Go get all   of it.
Just like that? I say.
Just like that, he says. Any problems, tell her I sent you.
Not until I get closer do I see who hes sent me to. She swivels and right away it feels to me as though there are no words between us for as long as Ive been alive.


Oh. My. God! she says. Whatre you doin here?
I look every which way, including past her. I am careful not to look into her.
Unc sent me, I say.
That black bastard did what! she says.
She shakes a golden weave around. Get away from here, she says. Leave! she says, and resists a step.
My uncle vaunts out of the dark, dark as the dark, his miraculously extravagant tooth glinting, a lit menthol in his scrawny sacrilegious hands, the taps audible on his double-vintage gators, his infinity- buttoned sport coat buttoned at his nexus. He calls her by a name  Ive never heard.
What seems to be the problem? Unc says, and flares his menthol. How could you? she says.
How could I not? he says.
I see Unc saunter closer, take an exaggerated drag, blow out a stream of perfect Os. Hes got it  by  blood,  Unc  says,  look  like in more ways than one. Unc proceeds to stab his earth-sized eyes at me, eyes that make me wonder what in the world he sees. Nephew, he says, we cant stop no ones nature. Me nor you can, no matter what, stop it.
I put my head down and reach out my hand, palm up.
My fucking word, I reach it out hoping in the shadows neither of them can see the tsunami in it.
I leave it out with an incantation murmuring. Head down, palm up. Head down. Palm up.
To me, she says. Of all people, me, she says. She calls me by  the name she named me a life ago.
No, I say. Its Champ, I say. Call me Champ, I say, and pro- nounce it stern, like I mean it, like it was for me. As if it was in me all alongor shouldve been.
The tsunami shakes up my arm and floods my chest. An eon passes or more before I feel a few crumbled bills alight, not many, but oh so heavy. I clutch the mass of them and leave my eyes shut for how long who could know, and when I open them, I see her down aways and stumbling. I watch her stop and peer and turn away from us. Farther, I see her slaughtered by shadow.


Then its me and Unc under a frail spastic light. The man drops his menthol and murders it under his shoe. This Unc of mine, he annuls the little space between us and throws an arm over my shoulder. He pulls me closer than he ever has, closer than I think he might ever again, and just like that he whispers something I dont hear for how hard my heart is pounding. Unc but for God knows, for me and him might never know why or will, he stops and turns us face-to-face, laying his handgigantic, colossal, massive, immaculateon me. Its where you are in relationship to, not who you claim ownership of, he says, positions us eye to eye, and makes a comment that to my mind means never capitulate.
Only Unc would never say a word like that. And me neither.
Until now that I did. I mean till now thatshit, shitI just have. And please, pleeeeease dead the undisputed heavyweight hatetroc- ity on my old Unc, cause say or think what you will, the man couldve
killed me. Instead of only leaving me wounded.
Really wounded. Afflicted for all time, but alive.
Which is allB  e l i e v e y  o U  M  e, r i g h t h a n d r a i S  e d,   t r U  t h B  e t o l d, o n e v e r y  t h i n g i l o v e, o n e v e r y              t h i n g g o d l o v e Smy uncle, yes, my uncle, has done.
And do you know where Id be, who Id be, minus this mans compassion?
You dont.
As a matter of fact, you couldnt.
Me and my uncle swagger almost in tandem to the spot where  hes parked his ride. He swings his door open, steps halfway in, and flashes that expensive grin of his across the hood.
Now, he says. Now, you ready?
Ready for anything, says me, the mans nephew, this mans flesh and blood.




23.
Hers
by O. A. Lindsey


Mundleson asked if I wanted to come with her. She arched her thick brown eyebrows, used the word latrine without awkwardness. They had taken her makeup away, revealing a drama of settled red pocks. Her dye-blond hair had no benefit of product.
I stared at her a little too long. Told her I had a fiance. Oh. Im sorry. Its just that, well.
Its just that everybody was fucking in the latrines. Port-o-lets labeled in Arabic whose plastic shells would rock and creak, emit- ting bathtub sounds throughout the night. Just that we were stuffed inside a corrugated-metal hangar outside Riyadh, were sweating, scared, and unwashed, confined to ordered rows of olive-colored canvas cots and duffel bags. SCUD missiles traversed the night sky and the moon hung sideways. Half a million Iraqi troops were poised for the Mother of All Battles.
We stared at each other for days. We picked out the weaklings and placed bets against them. We cleaned, then re-cleaned our carbines. Oiling barrels, breaking down sight assemblies. They knew better than to issue us ammunition.
Its just that, when not an activated Reservist, Evie Mundleson bar-backed at Game Day, a strip mall sports bar in North Tuscaloosa. Her body was losing to the free potato skins. Her nights were defined by Misty cigarettes, dead kegs, and tip-outs. And she was okay with


this, there, between walls covered in Crimson Tide jerseys and plastic NASCAR flags. Here, she was scared beyond panic, wanting only to be groped in the community toilet. Many felt the same.

They flew us to the front in the belly of a loud C130. We  sat  in cargo nets attached to the walls, bobbing in turbulence like babies  in bouncer seats, too low to see out the window. We landed in a gulf of dust  and were  jammed into  trucks and taken to  the compound, a small collection of tents inside a head-high berm of sand. A rocky desert horizon surrounded. We were ordered to calm down but stay sharp. Drink water.
Take chemical pills. Rumor was the pills were untested on humans, yet we stood at parade rest every morning on the Iraqi border in saggy, ill-fitting chemical suits, chewing the pills on command. It had been raining for days, so everything was soaked and beige and barren and slopped. (They had not briefed us on this wet climate.) (They had briefed us that Iraqis use American tanks and planes wed supplied them, after allso the only way to discern the enemy was if he was firing on you.) The chem gear felt like a fatsuit as you lumbered around the compound, your boots sucked into the mud. A10 Warthogs and F-whatevers ripped the sky, unleashing their ar- senal a few seconds north. Concussions from missile strikes buckled your knees, and shook you awake at night. Breathing meant wonder- ing about Sarin or VX asphyxia. A primary concern was whether your gas mask was truly airtight, or whether the atropine needle would break off in your femur when the time came to self-inject.
Take the pills. Drink water.
Atropine: often fused with opiates, used to quell the death rattle.
After a week, one woman refused. She said her body was messing up because of the pills. Actually, she said fucking up. She was Af- rican American, late twenties with short straightened hair. Thin legs but huge torso. She was ornery, and said fuck that, because the pills were fucking her up.
We took the pills. She would die from a SCUD. They told us she was crazy, and told her Suit yourself. They snickered in her face, treating her like another loud black chick with fat breasts and fried


hair. Like them, I imagined her cruising the mall in Tuscaloosa, talk- ing loud, dragging a baby boy by his arm.
She refused the pills. A couple of weeks later she had to go to the medical tent. She wasnt pregnantthey knew that much. But her period had disappeared; she wouldnt bleed, and nobody could tell her why. The medical tent shipped her down to the battalion hospi- tal, which shipped her down to the main hospital in Riyadh, which shipped her back up to camp to pack. Mother  fuck, she said. All    I wanted in this life was to serve, then to get home and start me a family. Now I cant even have no babies.
More tests were required. They sent her home. We never heard anything else.

Spec4 Janette cried about her kids. You went to the motor pool to requisition a truck, ducked in the tent and saw their photos taped to her field desk: two boys, towheaded, in miniature Alabama football uniforms. Dont ask if theyd been to the stadium on game day, or Janette would tear up and tell you  about  Mike Jr.,  singing made- up verses to Yea Alabama. (Danny had fallen asleep during the Iron Bowl!) She talked and cried over them to nobody, while sitting near you at chow. Raised her voice to nobody at all about DAN-  NYS TURTLE DIED OH MAN WHY AM I NOT THERE? She
missed them while you ate breakfast, just off of guard duty. For hours youd sat alone in a hutch at the edge of the compound, in the dark, facing the void through a slot between sandbags, your rifle aimed, your mind confabulating structures from the blackness. (Republican Guard Advance or geometric patterns, the mind must see something.) You tried to forget that youd spent your entire months furlough stuffed into the back of a transport truck, breathing diesel exhaust and eating dehydrated pork, in order to wait to use a pay phone to hear your fiances answering machine.
And missiles burst. And the rains passed and the mud turned back to sand and windstorms engulfed everything for days, filling your boots, your eyes, your lungs, covering you in rashes. And Spec. 4 Janette yapped.
In our twelve-man tent, talk cycled about her tight, workout body.


One night, PFC Lomes tells everyone that during guard duty he snuck into the motor pool to smoke and found Sergeant Cross pump- ing her. Says it just like this: Sergeant Cross was pumping her, man. She had that good-hurt look on her face. Like, she was bent over her field desk, gripping the corners! While telling us this he throws his hips like Sergeant Cross, grapples the air.
After Lights Out, in the break between jet screams, our tent was alive with fists rubbing against nylon sleeping bags. Everyone coming in silence.

When by-the-book Sergeant Motes was sent home for being too old and sclerotic, Tetley Teabag and I became the de facto Supply and Armory leaders. Benefits included our very own tent, just Teabag and me. We bartered goods with other squads, companies, camps, armies, whomever. Extra boots got us a large, in-tent ice cooler; surplus cam- mies were good for two foam mattresses; tent poles meant a radio, and so forth. We were sultans.
Tetley Teabag was a late-twenties, rural Alabama high-school graduate, desperate to be seen as a hard ass. He had the mustache, buzz cut, and accent, but was squat and soft and round. He also had the toe.
The Tetley Toe. Stateside, just before deployment, Tetley had thrust a post hole digger at the big toe of his left foot. This earned him an odd reattachment and a relentless wound. The medics made Tetley limp around on a so-called Chinese Jump Boot: an oversized medical shoe constructed of royal blue canvas and white Velcro straps. The roughnecks harassed him for this, as did the officers, and the women. But forget the boot. The thing about Tetley was that he NEVER went to the showers. Night after night he shut the tent flaps and wiped himself clean with a wet rag. In the dim orange lamplight, hed turn his puppyfat back to me and use this propane-powered camp stove to heat water in a tin basin. (By this point I was taking two, three, four cold showers a day. They kept drilling us for an attack that never came. The sand was everywhere. My lungs wheezed and my breath stank with it.) (This was also after Charlotte had stopped writing me.) As finale to Tetleys cleansing, he would put pajamas


on, then wrap a Tetley teabag around his blackened appendage. His grandmother sent boxes of them, instructing him that a womans remedy was the only kind of medicine a man could trust.
On guard duty one night I realized I had forgotten my gas mask, and had to come back to the tent. Though Tetley curled up the mument I cut through the flap, I saw what might be described as a mole or a nub, protruding from the thick beard between his legs.
I did not care that Tetley had the penis of an infant. Conversely, he seemed relieved to be uncloseted, because the next night, during a violent sandstorm he confessed to me that he was a virgin. Said he was worried about dying unfulfilled.
Mundleson is lonely, I yelled. We had to scream over the wind. We lay on our cots with our goggles on and our mouths covered by Government Issue scarves. Rubbers were unrolled over our gun bar- rels to keep the sand out. It was no use looking at each other because you couldnt see anything.
What?
I bet Mundlesond be your girlfriend, I shouted again.
Screw that, man. He called her pug-ugly, which was unfair, and which failed to trump the fact that he could not expose himself in theater. No two ways about it: to keep his secret and find a willing partner, Tetley would have to get home and marry some Christian.

After the nonmenstruating woman was sent away, only two black girls remained. Back home they went to the U. of A. One of them,  Davis, had screwed this cheeseball Joe Minetti in the toilet back at Riyadh. So there was that, and somehow that had become attractive.
This, too, was after Charlotte stopped writing.
Davis was inspiring. Curvy and defiant and laughing, always sharp. One morning, the X.O. ordered the two women and me to burn the latrine waste. He didnt say as much, but I figured this was my pun- ishment for hiding in the showers. The black chicks did not have to figure anything. Our company was all Alabama rednecks and Spec 4 Janettes, so they knew theyd just been born wrong.
We yanked large metal tubs from beneath seat-holes in the ply- wood toilets and burned what was inside. Having been half-filled


with diesel the week before, we found the tubs brim-high with turd and tampax, vomit and ejaculate and toilet paper. And we lit all that on fire, and then walked from tub to tub, hour after hour, taking in putrid black smoke.
Diesel burns slow and wont explode when you light it. Nor will it penetrate the surface of the sewage. So you use a two-by-four to stir the char, to expose the flame to the sludge below.
Scorching shit in the desert. You get used to it. After a few hours, the three of us flirted around the feces. The sky was beige and gray. The sliver of landscape we saw over the compound berm was as barren as the moon.
Yall dont date black girls in yalls fraternity? Davis asked. Probably not, I said. But Im not against it.
You sayin you have dated a black girl? Well, no. But Ive thought about it.
I bet you have. She laughed, then coughed.
She and I both knew a liaison would follow. She had overnight guard duty, alone, at the far corner of the berm. She said she needed company. I needed company.
Diesel will now and again race like gasoline. This happened as I was stirring a tub: a flame shot  straight up  the two-by-four,  which I flung out of panic. It hit Davis across the chest, smearing on her desert camo blouse.
What tha hell was that, you? she yelled. Sorry, sorry. Fire just jumped.
You out your goddamn mind? She wiped her hands on me, then peeled off her blouse and wiped that on me, too. She was not wearing her required T-shirt and her breasts bulged from the top of her olive green bra.
Reaction, I said. I
What kinda man throws a flaming sticka shit at a woman?
Both women cursed me and left for other fires. Though I tried to apologize several times, and soon bartered them both to the Frogs, neither spoke to me again.
This, in slow motion: the soiled board, twirling like a helicopter blade, aflame.


*	*	*
I strung up a large piece of cardboard across the tent wall behind my cot. I pinned photos on it of women Id slept with, or whose pic- tures with me indicated that I mightve. Drunken hugs at fraternity parties, suggestive poses, kisses on my cheek. These werent the only photos I brought to combat. But after word got out that Id spent a week on suicide watch in the medical tent, it became vital that I not be seen as a weak-ass, a Tetley.
Not Pictured: Charlotte, in a royal blue armchair near the window, dressed only in a white cotton shirt that was unbuttoned at the top. Sleeves gently rolled, her tan legs tucked under her on the wide chair cushion. I lay on the motel bed, naked except for dog tags. The windows were open, the transparent curtains billowed. She said we should look forward to being married when I got back. I did.

They dragged rank prisoners down the dirt road beside camp like a slave march. They had stains on the seat of their pants and dust in their mustaches, and begged us for the chewing gum and the salt packets from our MREs. Who knows where they went. Rumor was that they were nobodies, just a bunch of haji towel-head farmers, and we had better forget about them and get focused for the ground as- sault.
There was nothing happening. It was all outside compound walls, staggering by, exploding in the distance.

My grandmother wrote a letter in scrabbled blue ink. It was the first she had written since World War II, when my grandfather had done tours both in Europe and the Pacific. I do not know why she didnt send word to my father, in Vietnam.
When I was very young, going through a drawer, I found an old black-and-white centerfold. Opening the tri-folded paper, I was floored by this first vision of glorious sex. So much so that I did not recognize the subject. My mother walked in and caught me ogling, then nervously explained that shed had her face superimposed on the body as a joke for my father when he was in combat.
Every day, every war, everybody waits for mail call.


*	*	*
At some point, reborn from a psych eval down in Riyadh, I came to realize that war was more about dividends than killing. I needed a product. I started to make wine.
This old Choctaw cook had deep gulleys in his cheeks and when he spoke he emitted a soft whistle over the letter S: Sholdier, bishcuit, misshile. He gave me a few packets of yeast, and taught me how to make applejack. Soon after, I was trading liters of it, alongside grape- jack, orange juice-jack and whatever-fruit-juice-I-could-get-jack, for fresh chicken and near-beer and battery-powered speakers.
One morning, a couple of French troops appeared. Not because theyd heard of my work as a vintner, but because they needed a translator, and because one of the mechanics suspected that I might know a little French, being a college faggot and all. I cannot remem- ber what the Frenchmen officially sought, but the next morning, in exchange for five gallons of two-week-old applejack, an entire pallet of French rations was delivered to my tent. Tetley was angry. I told him to get ready for the Perrier.
The French meals came in tins, not brown plastic sacks. You didnt heat them by dropping floppy packets into warm water, you set the entire tin on Tetleys propane flame, then let the food baste in its own juices and herbs. Instead of Dehydrated Pork Patty, this was lapin avec haricots verts.
No shit, Tetley. Its rabbit, man. Bunny. No shit?
Yeah. And we got tons of bunny, man. Half yours, too. You can bitch-bath in Perrier if you want.
This was, indeed, a mument. A fine mument. Cluster bombs, tracer rounds, intestinal parasitesavec haricots verts.
A five-gallon jug of bad wine was only worth a pallet of rabbit. The Perrier was traded for information about the location of the female sleeping quarters, when and where to cross over the berm, whether the women drank, if they were easy, and so on. My French was better than I thought, and my answers worth an ocean of bubbling water.
The next morning we were ordered to  a  meeting with our C.O.  He informed us that a bunch of drunk stinking Frogs had spent the


night in the womens tent. He said this was a war, not an orgy. Guard duty was redoubled. I was ordered to latrine detail.

Charlotte wrote that she was pregnant. Then she never wrote again. I burned shit in the desert and watched A10s rip the sky.
The battalion colonel briefed us by saying that Intel had lost an Iraqi Special Forces unit in our areaSo Stay Sharp, Dogs. That night I left my guard post, climbed over the berm, and walked into the void. The red lens cover was on my flashlight; I aimed it forward and followed the circle. Daybursts of missile hit just up the road, briefly illuminating the blackness. I prayed for someone to fire on me as I neared the front. Nobody did. Darkness swallowed me, though the rocks and sand in the red circle of the flashlight vibrated with the missile strikes. I lay on the ground for a while to feel this, then put my ear against a large rock to see how it sounded. I got up and wan- dered for an hour or so, scouring that landscape. I found a cluster of three tiny white flowersthe only living nature Id seen for weeks. I yanked them, then went back to the tent and wrote Charlotte for the last time, asking her to remember no matter what. To please make a list of details about me from back home, from before. I put the flow- ers in the envelope and was done.

One sunset, some general helicoptered in, gave us a ten-minute speech about victory, then left. He had a slight gut but strong posture, and he walked back and forth in his beige cammies as the red sun melted down behind him. We never saw him again, but he made clear that we would lead the invasion, would spearhead a 155-mile thrust into Baghdad, crushing any rag-wrapped cunt who got in our way.
Every vehicle was armored. We sandbagged the deuce-and-a-half truck beds; we welded metal plates on the dozers and dumps. We jerry-rigged a .50 cal mount on a pickup cab and pretended to know how to use it.
They said Go.
For a mute instant there was no gender. We charged north, trucks and guns, past missile craters, charred vehicles and burned trash. It was apocalyptic and eerie, and we were wonderfully on edge.


We located a collection of goatskin-covered foxholes, and exited the trucks. Our rifles set on 3-round semiautomatic burst, we stalked up with gunstocks to our cheeks. The holes were empty save for Arab pinups and empty water bottles and cigarette butts. The airplanes had done all the killing. We pushed on, north, so very much in search of death.
The convoy drove for hours on the same scab of earth, no enemy in sight, our own tracks disappearing behind us in sand drift. At some point the combat-support vehicles just stopped.
They had radioed and said to turn around. The war was over.
We got out of the trucks in the middle of Iraq and took our hel- mets off. We yelled and unloaded our rifles, ejaculating brass casings all over the desert. The silence was unbreakable.

Tetley and I were ordered to make a supply run and find a victory feast. We cruised the desert highway, a crisp gray seam of asphalt through the beige landscape. Out of nowhere, an enormous cloud of sand rose ahead of us. Tetley drove straight into it, passing a massive armament convoy. Flitting strips of red, white, and blue nylon tied to tank antennae against the grainy Arabian sky.
On the shoulder to our right I saw a camel. She sat there, buckled down on all fours, groaning. To our left, soldiers stood up in the beds of transport trucks, whooping and dancing and grabbing their crotches. Pop music blared, brakes squealed. The convoy trucks were sluggish and clumped together, billowing the enormous sand cloud. Armed Forces Radio announced total victory; President Bush de- clared an end to the Vietnam era.
A thin film of sand coated the camels black eyes, and crusted her eyelashes. The troops, many shirtless, their silver dog tags wagging, yelled and waved, and danced, the exhaust stacks spewing and horns blaring, the music cranked from boomboxes. All of it, us, charging eastwest in a horde along an unmarked two-lane in the desert.
Next to the camel was her calf. It had tire tracks on its belly and a bunch of bloody black gut-ropes shooting out its ass. I was amazed at how precisely indented the tread grooves were on the tiny ribcage. Tetley never saw this. I looked over and watched him pump his fist at


the soldiers, and I didnt say anything. We passed the camels, the fe- males head cocked upward, her eyes staring at me, her mouth open, bleating.

When we started to break camp, Saudi farmers loitered outside the compound, lured by our discarded plywood and burlap and such. Given their gestures and keyword English, we determined that they wanted to use the scraps to repair animal hutches, make sheds and so forth. Do whatever it is farmers do with wood and corrugated metal. Hour after hour, days in the sun, the men stood there, white robes and red headscarves. They grinned and mock-saluted, standing just beyond the compound wall next to their tiny white Datsun trucks.
We were ordered to give them nothing. Haji fuckers are tricky, they said. You never know what kind of weapon can be fashioned from canvas or particleboard.
After a few days the farmers brought their daughters out to greet us. Not kids, not sons, but daughters, head to foot in black robes, bearing the wind like polluted ghosts. Waving at us. When this had no effect, the daughters were made to remove their veils. They pros- tituted smeary lipstick smiles. (One of the guys who talked to them swore it was house paint, not makeup.) Still, we trucked all of the materials out, passing them by, diesel exhaust and catcalls from cabs, en route to the burn site.
Tremendous pyres dotted the desert expanse around us. Streaks of black smoke rose into the sky. Tents, tarps, plywood scraps; Meals Ready to Eat, water jugs, candy wrappers, tires, extra uniforms . . . All of it was stacked into large pyramids and set on fire.
The farmers still stood there, waiting. We tried to run them off. Their enthusiasm waned but they still smiled, smiled and waved when you took stuff to be burned, and we couldnt look at them anymore, and we yelled at them, or just waved and smiled and said Hi, Haji fuckface or whatever, or swerved the truck at them just a little bit, just enough to get them to jump back. We catcalled their daughters. We spat.
Alongside the order to burn, we had orders that every single grain of sand be removed from every single piece of equipment: dozers,


pans, back-end-loaders, trucks, and so on. By no means would we be bringing home any Holy Land. They built a massive parking lot in the middle of the desert, then parked hundreds of vehicles there, in rows. With the pyres littering the landscape around us, we washed sand off of things.
Evie Mundleson and I were ordered to scour the ambulance with power sprayers. It had never been used, so the detail was a joke. We opened the bay doors and sprayed the metal walls and the metal bunks and the open metal shelving. Sandy water poured onto the ground. Three large black scorpions washed out.
I walked over, kicked the scorpions around for a minute. Laughed while they pinched at my boot.
Come on, man, she said, then stomped them.  I asked her if she was excited to go home.
No way. You?
Nope.

Last stop was Khobar Towers, a residential building complex outside Riyadh. In the courtyard between the high-rises the Army leashed up a camel. You could pay five dollars for a Polaroid with it. They set up vending, bad pepperoni pizza, and nonalcoholic beer, and kiosks sold cheap Saudi souvenirs, prayer rugs and T-shirts. There was a pool.
Amid the thousands in that sober Araby I ran across D. Garcia, this skinny Mexican Id grown tight with during basic training at Fort Jackson. An Army truck driver, D. Garcia had logged over a mil- lion miles in theater. I told him I only wanted to be back in that sand. He wanted to be back on that highway.
That nightthe last time I would ever see himD. Garcia and I falsified a requisition for a transport truck, a deuce-and-a-half, and stole into some immigrant area of the city, Filipino, where hed dis- covered you could buy black market rotgut. It was nasty and clear and came in plastic water bottles. We got drunk and skidded all over back-alley Riyadh, screaming out of the truck cab.
Back at Khobar we staggered through the hallways, playing com- mando. We gave hand signals like in the movies, and then snuck into


rooms. There, Garcia aimed his fingers at sleeping troops, mock-fired several rounds, then stepped back into the hall and on to clear the next quarters.
Behind one door we found the women, splayed out on cots, sleep- ing in army green panties, a thin layer of sweat on their exposed skin. Evie Mundleson was among them, asleep on her chest, shirtless, her breasts all smushed out. D. Garcia cocked his eyebrow at me, raised the barrel of his finger-gun to the roof, motioned for me to go inside. I nodded. He pointed two fingers at his eyes, and then at me, and then disappeared forever. I saw myself stumble over to her; I heard the moan that would erupt as I yanked down her battlefield panties and shoved it all straight up her ass.
I still dont know what stopped me from doing this. Really, there was no barrier left. Yet Im pretty sure I went to my bunk and jerked off in silence.

Families and cameras on the tarmac at Bragg. It was hot and humid, and Charlotte was not there, though I couldnt stop looking for her. People hugged people, hugged children, hugged reporters. Every hand waved those little American flags you find in the cemetery. Someone handed out Southwest Asia Service Ribbons, the same medal awarded to Vietnam vets.
That night we put a bunch of bottles together, tequila, Jgermeister, Jack, whathaveyou. It was guys only. Everyone brought a fifth of the liquor theyd missed most. We drank violently, sitting Indian-style on the patio outside the barracks, our dog barks reverberating off the con- crete into the warm southern evening. We piled into a minivan cab and went to town. The driver didnt even ask, Where to? He just dumped us on a busy, soldiered street full of bars. We wandered among hun- dreds of redeployed troops, amidst loud music and vendors and neon. A barker talked us into one of the endless, nasty clubs.
Cigarettes and air freshener and terrible music. A brown-skinned woman in a denim miniskirt and halter top marched up to me, and I asked her for a beer. She said nothing, only yanked me to the back of the room by my upper arm as the guys howled. She pulled me behind a curtain, lifted her halter, placed my hands on her large breasts, then


put her own hands over mine and began rubbing us in circles. It made me think of a Laundromat.
You like these tits? she asked.
Uh-huh, I answered. She might have been Mexican. She walked me into a small room with a lamp and an olive-colored military cot. I had to put both hands on the wall to hold myself up as she undid my pants and put a condom over me. She sat on the cot and started to work me over like a machine, licking my anus for a few seconds, mouthing my testicles, fellating me just enough to promote erection. Straight-up checklist: hike miniskirt, panties to ankles, bend over. Enfranchise me with hard statements about my masculinity as I pen- etrate. I finished instantly but tried to keep going, accidentally lodg- ing the condom inside her. I handed her all my money, then stumbled into a bathroom stall and wept.

In Tuscaloosa I borrowed a pair of eyeglasses from a friend, pulled an Alabama ball cap low on my brow, and went to see Charlotte, un- announced. I had never worn glasses, so everything was blurry. My clothes felt borrowed and dated, and were musty from a year in the drawer. She answered the door and we stood there, saying nothing, until finally she said she was glad to see me. She was sorry how things worked out.
It had just rained and was July hot. There was no baby. You could smell that the box hedges outside her apartment had just been clipped. I had not re-acclimated to southern humidity and a constellation of zits had erupted on my face. I asked if she wanted to go to the zoo    or something. I cannot remember if we went. I really have no idea.
I am positive, however, that the next time I saw her it was twelve years later, far from Alabama. At the edge of the frozen fish section at Costco Wholesale, in Chicago, Illinois. Another Bush was presi- dent, and a war in the same desert was breaking wide open. And there she was.
Only, I wasnt nineteen. I was a grown man. One of thousands whod been slowly drawn away. Away from fathers who fought in better wars, from male friends whose only interest was whether or not theyd killed anyone. From churches in small southern towns


where they were made to stand on Veterans Day. Instead of the VFW or the VA, this crybaby diaspora sought out spaces both alien and familiar: exurb, highway, divorce court, Costco. These were grown men who shopped for discount liquor in bulk. Grown men whose doctors could not explain the sensation of fire beneath the skin. Men who could not pin their failed relationships on anything quantifiable, who obsessed over the inability to recover the lives they saw on TV. A grown man in a beige suede jacket that had lost its nap, and who had spent the many previous days on the floor of his efficiency, watching a new invasion unfold on a small television. Missile strikes at remove, rabbit ears adjusted, a rerun that somehow eclipsed the original. He showered and sobbed and masturbated.
Nobody ever asks about the grown women.
Charlotte was still pretty and soft-spoken, though now with a masters and a career, and the confidence to look squarely at the past. We stood under the fluorescence, smiling past each other, eyeball- ing bulk cod, scrod, halibut. Before I could ask, she got my phone number, and said we should get a cup of coffee.
Of course, she never called.
Why on earth would we ever go back? was the last I ever heard.

Driving across the country had been Jacobs idea, but Sheila was the one who insisted they return along the Highline Highway. Through- out the trip shed navigated and hed done most of the driving, a com- promise hed insisted on to keep her from behind the wheel where she turned into someone else altogether: obscene, misanthropic, possibly homicidal. The route she plotted was circuitousrevenge, he sus- pectedalways avoiding interstates, opting instead for old two-lane highways. The Highline fit right into that.
Jacob had suggested they just go south a bit, get on I90, which would take them through Bozeman. Hed show them  where  hed lived and the stadium where hed played cornerback for the football team. But Sheila said no, theyd stay up where they were. They hadnt come on this trip for a nostalgia tour.
Other than the miles that passed through Glacier National Park, there was nothing to look at except endless fields of low-cut barley, broken only by the syncopated thuds of telephone poles, and patheti- cally small towns named after lonely men. Sheila said, I can see why you left this place.
I didnt live here. Bozemans in the mountains.
I know, I know, so pretty, all that skiing, blah, blah. But  this, she rapped the window with a knuckle, is what I always sort of imagined. This is what I thought you were running away from. Her


window was cracked open and dark hair blew around her face. She kept pushing it behind her ears, but in seconds it was free again.
It sure is bleak, he said, to get her to be quiet, though he wanted to say he hadnt been running away from anything.
In the backseat, Janey had her headphones plugged into the iPhone theyd bought her as consolation for coming away all summer with her parents. For the past few thousand miles shed poured her attention into the little screen as if it were her last link to a dying civilization. Hed known Janey wouldnt want to come on the trip, but he hadnt expected the almost imperturbable sheen of indifference shed put on since the second day. She pretended not to hear them when they asked her questions, and remained bored and annoyed even as theyd vis- ited the Grand Canyon, the La Brea tar pits, and through the hike in the Redwood Forest. She wanted to be home with her friends from fourth grade, lying around the public pool, watching the older kids flirt in their too-revealing suits. And though hed been relentlessly upbeat all trip, even Jacob was ready to get home. The Accord, which he always kept immaculate, was littered with food wrappers, tourist flyers, ripped-up maps, and the seats were sticky from spilled soda and mashed crumbs.
Did you ever come up here? Sheila asked. No, he said, too quickly.
Never? He didnt look over, but could tell she was smiling at him. Maybe, I dont know.
She picked up the map and ran a finger along the page. But isnt Bozeman just down here? Its not far at all. For you Westerners.
I said maybe. He knew he sounded defensive, but he couldnt help it. Twenty years had passed. Half his life. This place had nothing to do with him anymore.
When? When did you come up here? She always knew when he was hiding something, and could never let it alone.
I dont know. One time, I think. For what?
The lie surged up in a welcome rush. With the football team. We played an exhibition in Saskatchewan. I think it was a recruitment thing. Up in Regina.


She turned the map over to the yellow mass of Canada.
The memories came steadily: Jacob had answered the door in his boxers, mouth sweet from a night of beers, and blinked. Standing there was a man with a white beard who said theyd been watching him at practice. For a second hed thought the man was a scout, but that didnt fit with the coarse black suit, the beard with no mustache. In the old mans hands was a large black hat with a wide brim. Behind him was a younger man with the same hat, only on his head. They had a proposition for him. Why didnt he get dressed and theyd take him to lunch?
Its kind of mesmerizing, Sheila said. Just goes on and on and on. I think youd go a little nuts, living here.
Sure would.
And there we go, one of the local crazies. She pointed to a horse and buggy, standing in the breakdown lane. Whatre they, Amish? I dont know. He sped up, but the cart lingered in the rearview. They live up here all winter? Without electricity? With wood
stoves?
I guess.
That must be so cold. The poor kids. Must be.
Sheila turned and looked out the back window and when she straightened out said, Hey, why dont you stop.
He looked in the rearview, thinking she meant to help the cart. An old man with a thick white beard had been kneeling beside the wheel. Why?
Just stop, she said.
I cant, were on the highway.
What? Just do it, Jacob. Theres no traffic.
Jesus, Sheila, its dangerous. And Janeys watching her thing. So what? Janey can pry herself away for five seconds.
What do you want to stop for? He could no longer see the cart.
It was probably miles back by now. I want a picture. Just stop.
Easing into the breakdown lane he said this wasnt a good idea, but she turned back to Janey and snapped her fingers in front of the


girls glassy eyes. Wind slammed into the door when he opened it. As he made his way around the car a semi roared past, shaking the air.
Here, Sheila shouted over the wind, holding out the camera. Get one of us.
Janey held her mothers hand, dazed and compliant. They climbed down the gravel slope so that when he looked at the camera they were framed entirely by the yellow fields. They were beautiful, his ladies: both with thick dark hair, pale skin, and translucent blue eyes. The backs of their legs, hed seen as they walked down the slope,  were red and impressed with the crisscross seat pattern, but through the camera lens they were perfect, the finished version and the smaller replica, both prettier than he felt he had any claim to hope for.
Smile, he shouted into the wind.
Sheila insisted on checking the image, wanted another, but he re- fused, imagined the buggy catching up to them, imagined Sheila striking up a conversation with the man. He walked around the car and got behind the wheel, started the engine, and because he was rushing he didnt check the mirror and so didnt see the truck, pass- ing so close it seemed to hit him in the eyes, the horn blaring, the wheels within inches of the hood, then the second set of wheels, and he turned them back into the breakdown lane, wheels spinning in the loose gravel. Only at the last second did he manage to correct the turn and head back out onto the road, but too fast, so that they hit the ridge of asphalt with a crack.
The truck disappeared into the distance. They drove in silence. Oh my god, Sheila said
We almost died, Janey shouted. We almost had an accident! She leaned forward, clutching Sheilas headrest.
Yes, he said, pushing on the accelerator. Then, Put your seat belt on, right now.
What happened? Sheila said.
That truck just came out of nowhere. You almost killed us.
On purpose, Sheila. I did it on purpose.
When he looked over she was crying. Im sorry, he said. That just scared the shit out of me.


In the lull that followed he noticed a rattle coming from the back of the car. The noise got louder. Soon he could barely hear Sheila shout they should probably stop next time they found a place.

The mechanic wiped his hands on a rag and said there was a crack in the manifold. Could they drive? That was all they needed, just to get home. They could, the man said, but if they hit a bump the whole exhaust system might just fall out on the road.
So how long to fix it? Jacob said.
Well, the man said, looking back into the shop. Im pretty full.
Jacob said hed pay whatever it took. The man frowned, squeezing the oily rag. For another five hundred, I could probably do that.
Good. Great, fine, Jacob said. With the cost of the labor and parts that brought the total over two thousand, but what were they going to do, sit it out in this road-bump town for a week until the mechanic got around to them? Sheila would be pissed and blame him. But she was the one whod insisted on the Highline Highway. If theyd gone his way theyd be in Bozeman, strolling through campus, or driving slowly around his old neighborhoods. Now they were in this nothing town, which hed realized, as soon as they drove past the welcome sign, he had been through before.
Twenty years ago, hed taken the bus up from Bozeman with the ticket the old man with the white beard, Elisha, had handed him across the diner table. The bus would be more comfortable, the old man assured him, than riding all the way up with him and his son, Adam, in the buggy. Theyd pick him up in this town, where I15 hit Route 2, and take him the rest of the way out to their community.
Hed heard of these people before, some sort of Amish, or Men- nonite, or Anabaptists, he wasnt sure exactly. Hed seen them a few times while riding to football games in the bus.
How familiar was he with their community? the old man had asked over lunch, which it turned out only Jacob was eating. Not very, Jacob admitted, chewing a strip of bacon. They wouldnt bore him with the details, but one thing about their life was that they were isolated, out in the plains above the Highline. The old man seemed to be winking at hima tick, but it drew attention to the old mans


eyes, sunk into a thicket of wrinkles, the whites distinctly yellow and thatched with red veins.
Must be tough, Jacob had said, stupidly, as the man seemed to want a response.
We manage. By working together. We are a very close community. And that was also the problem. Elisha had hired a researcher at the university to study their bloodlines and had been told that if they didnt get an infusion of new genes, the community would begin to degrade. The truth was theyd already started to see this: stillbirths, defects. Mental retardation, the old man had said in his weird
accent, as if hed come over on a boat from Germany.
Jacob was about to say he didnt have any interest in joining their community, but the old man held up a hand. You would only need to come and live with us for one week, and we will pay you very well for this.
Pay me for what?
Three thousand dollars, Elisha said, leaning forward, clearly awed by the number.
For what? Three thousand dollars for what? At the time, Jacob had twenty-seven dollars and nineteen cents in his checking account. I explained, the old man said. We need new blood. You will be
the new blood.
For one week, Jacob said. They wanted him to come up to their community and give some of his blood. No, his genes.  Fuck  that,  his sperm. He almost laughed, but looked over at the old mans son, Adam, who was glaring with just-contained hate. Jacob wondered if hed be screwing this guys wife.
That is all the money we have, Elisha said, holding his calloused palms up, as if to prove it. We cannot offer more.
Okay, Jacob said, sipping his coffee. That sounds like a deal to me. Even that afternoon hed wonder why he said yes. The money? The plain weirdness of the offer? But he didnt think it was even as rational as that. Hed been hungover, which made him both euphoric and depressed, and it was this swirl of feeling that had made him say yes, a surge of hysteria. Then, as soon as he said yes, it seemed there was no way to back out, though of course he couldve at any point.


There was no one he could tell about the proposition. His friends wouldnt have believed him, and what if they had? That might be worse. So he was on his own to wonder, increasingly, why hed said yes, and why theyd chosen him. How long  had  they been  watch-  ing him? Just this weekend, or had they been watching him walk to class, watching him head in sweatpants and sweatshirt to the gym each morning for weight training, head out to the fields in the after- noon for practice? Had they followed him back to his apartment and watched him through the kitchen window, shoveling mac n cheese into his mouth? And what had they seen that had made them settle on him? Why not any of the other guys on the team? He knew he was good-looking, had always had an easy time with girls, could just wait for them to drape themselves across the hard slabs of his shoulders and soon theyd be moaning beneath him on whatever  creaky bed  or sofa was on hand. He was six foot three, two hundred twenty-five pounds, with a thick head of light-brown hair (which, in his mid- thirties, had started thinning, leaving him bald on top, a trait Elisha and Adam probably werent yet aware of), and he had a strong jaw. His mother had called it a movie-star jaw. My little leading man, shed called him. They must have chosen him for his looks, since they propositioned him before meeting him. His personality, such as it was, didnt matter in the slightest. He couldve been anyone, a mur- derer, a sadist. The old mans plan was stupid and even dangerous. For them, and for him. Out in their community hed be surrounded. They could kill him and bury his body in some barren field. But still hed packed a small duffel bag and, as soon as the semester ended and the cold had gripped all of Montana, he walked through the creaking snow to the bus station.
After the mechanic settled up with Jacobs credit cardIm afraid
in this case Im going to have to get it all now, hed saidJacob  asked if there was a car he could use.
The man led him out to a back lot, through a chain link fence to    a battered old Datsun with South Dakota plates. The car barely ran, the engine dry and raspy, and the seats smelled like body odor and mold. Jacob honked for his wife from the lot of the diner and had to step out of the car to wave when she didnt recognize him.


As they drove to the motel, a low-slung building like a supersized trailer, bound on all sides by a field of weeds and small, wind-shaken trees, he explained the situation.
We have to stay here? Janey said, glaring out the window at two boys standing up on the pedals of their bikes.
Just for tonight. Itll be fine.
How much is it going to be? Sheila said, face already hardened with blame.
Enough, honey, okay? Its going to be enough. Thankfully, she let it go.
In their room, which cost eighty dollars a night, he asked what they wanted to do.
What exactly is there to do? Sheila said. Did I miss something?
All I saw was a Dollar Store and that disgusting diner.
There was that movie theater. Or we could just drive around.  To look at cornfields? Sheila said, sitting on the creaking bed
and turning on the television. I think weve done that. Barley, Jacob said.
Whatever. The answer is no. Im staying right here in our lovely room.
Well, Im going to go drive, Jacob said. If thats okay. Whatever, Sheila said, waving him away.
Janey? he said. She shook her head vigorously, as if otherwise he might scoop her up and subject her to some arcane torture.
Ill be back, he said, hurrying out.
As he backed out of his spot the Datsun coughed and clattered, ex- actly like a car hed driven back in college, a clunker hed bought from a graduating senior for four hundred dollars, a car you could drive drunk and not worry about, because what was the worst that could happen? Youd crash the thing, but that was no big deal. They were nineteen, twenty, invulnerable. He felt for a mument that sense of his old self, his old confidence, was returning, as if the fabric between the man as he was now and the man hed been was lifted by a strong wind. But then he caught a glimpse of himself in the rearview as he backed out: his wrinkled face, the tanned top of his head, dusted with the remains of his hair, grown too long on the trip, and the curtain


fell heavily back in place and he was once more a thirty-nine-year-old high school teacher and football coach in rural Pennsylvania.
He passed the garage where he saw his car parked in the lot, the windows all rolled down, two other cars up on the jacks. The town dwindled away to nothing after that.
When hed come up on the bus twenty years ago, Elisha had been waiting for him at the station. Elisha explained he wasnt  allowed  to park the buggy in the lot, but it wasnt far. Jacob noticed people eyeing them as they walked out onto the main street. Maybe Elisha had come here first, made the offer to a few of the locals, before head- ing farther down to Bozeman and the gullible college students who had nothing at stake. All hed had to do was call his parents back in Pennsylvania and tell them he had to stay after the end of the semes- ter, but only a few days, for a football thing. Anything having to do with football had always been good enough for them. Throughout high school, when hed been a varsity starter from sophomore year on, theyd prepared him for his time as a star, but by  mid-junior year it was clear he wasnt good enough for Penn State, or any Big Ten school, so he started looking through the letters sent him from schools hed never heard of, including  Montana  State  University. On the cover of the brochure thered been a red brick building and high, snow-capped mountains in the background, students walking through pristine air. Hed known no one in Montana and though hed always made friends easily and did on campus, hed felt com- pletely alone the entire four years he was out west. Maybe Elisha had seen something of this. Maybe the old mans spartan, religious life had allowed him some insight into the person Jacob was. Maybe hed be able to let Jacob in on what hed seen.
Had  they talked on  that buggy ride  out  to  the community?  Itd
taken hours, but he didnt remember saying a word. What he remem- bered was feeling, as they rumbled along, that he was doing the right thing. Elishas people needed one of the most basic things in life, and he could provide it. But what the hell was going to happen, exactly? Since that breakfast in the diner Jacob had masturbated many times to fantasies of sleeping with young women, virgins, but also older women, widows, or maybe even married women. But as they pulled


out of town and started along  the breakdown lane of  the highway, he started worrying about the details. Would there be specific rules? Was someone going to be watching, to make sure he didnt do any- thing forbidden? As they turned onto a narrow road marked by two white mailboxeswhich were still there when Jacob drove in with the Datsun; he braked hard, just making the turnhe started to get afraid. What if this was actually some sort of death cult, some sort of ritual sacrifice? Hed thought about getting a gun before leaving Bozeman, of hiding it in his duffel, just in case. In the buggy, as they were enveloped by the endless fields, he wished he had.
There was another turn off the state road to get to the community, but he couldnt remember where. Hed have missed it if not for the family walking along with their cows, the mother leading the way, two young girls beside her, all three women with black bonnets on their heads, long black skirts brushing around their ankles. Behind the cows were a father and son, the boy no older than five or six, the father probably not much older than Jacob had been when hed been brought out here, which was how old his child, the child hed been brought to make, would be now. Hed been twenty and that was nineteen years ago. His kid would be eighteen. Father and son wore straw cowboy hats and stiff black pants rode up above boxy black shoes and held long switches they brought gently down on the sway- ing rumps of the cows. Jacob backed up and turned onto the narrow dirt road. As he passed, the father looked up and touched the brim of his hat.
When theyd arrived in the buggy, Elisha had taken him directly to the house where hed be staying. The building was behind Elishas house, in the center of the community, a tidy cluster of white houses. To Jacob it looked more like a glorified shed, a single room with a bed, a wooden dresser, a single wooden chair. There was one window without shutters or a curtain. On the wall beside the bed was a pot- bellied stove, a funnel running up to the ceiling, and beside it, a pile of chopped kindling. An outhouse was just down the path, and a bedpan was under the bed, Elisha said.
Does this look acceptable? We thought you might like this better than staying in the house. We thought you might want privacy.


Of course, its fine, Jacob said, tossing his duffel bag onto the bed, which creaked under the weight. When he looked back at Elisha the old man was frowning, as if hed expected something more from Jacob. Thanks? Excitement?
Everyone is at a meeting. They are waiting for me. Do you need anything?
Without giving Jacob a chance to respond, Elisha walked out. Jacob thought he heard a lock turning, but when he tried the knob    a few minutes later it opened and he looked out. He found what he thought was the churchthere was no cross, but it was the biggest building in townand studied the windows, trying to see in, but from that distance all he could see was the hint, now and then, of a dark shape, and though he strained to hear complaints, shouts, pro- tests, rage in the voices of the men whod come and find him in this shed and bludgeon him with the sharp edge of a shovel, he heard nothing but wind.
There was a single gas lamp beside his bed, but he wasnt sure how to light it, so he used the flashlight hed brought when dark came early. He was looking at the white spot on the ceiling when Elisha came in, stepping aside to make room for a woman, his wife. She set a plate, covered with a towel, on the dresser. Theyd brought him some dinner. They hoped he was comfortable. Again, without wait- ing for an answer they left and this time he distinctly heard the turn- ing of a key, and when he tried the door he found it locked. Maybe  for his safety. After eating the entire plate of potatoes, green beans, and chicken, he turned off the flashlight and was plunged into solid, depthless black.
Jacob recognized the church, and farther on he saw Elishas house. Behind it the gray shed looked even smaller than hed remembered. After that first night hed thought maybe he was going to be locked up in the shed all week, but the next morning Elisha took him around the community and introduced him to the men. They greeted him kindly, though once or twice the men seemed to squeeze his hand harder than necessary. He wasnt introduced to the women, but they were there, walking past on the roads between the homes, nodding to him, or maybe it was to Elisha. The same was true of the children,


especially the little boys, tiny, creepy versions of their fathers with the same hats in smaller sizes.
As he drove past, the doors of the meeting hall opened and chil- dren poured out, little boys leading the way, leaping off the four white steps and landing clumsily in the yard, then racing toward the play- ground equipment, an elaborate dark wooden structure with swings and a bouncy bridge. Back when hed been here before, thered been no playground, and from what hed been able to tell the kids hadnt spent much time playing, but now even the girls were climbing onto the swings, which the boys had left empty, and soon they were rising high, their hair trailing out beneath their bonnets, the thick pleats of their skirts lifting up and falling down. The oldest looked like they were not quite teenagers. Twelve, maybe.
His second night in the community hed been led back to his shed after dinner with Elisha, his wife, and their unmarried son, Mat- thew, who was mildly retarded. Dinner began with a long, elaborate prayer, and then followed in near total silence. Matthew kept looking up quickly, as if continually surprised to find Jacob there, opening his mouth, then snapping his thick lips shut again and staring down at his plate. Back at the shed Elisha held open the door for him and looked at his shoes.
She will be here soon. I will leave you to prepare.
Ill be waiting, Jacob said, but knew that that sounded strange, maybe too eager, so he smiled and tried hard to think of something else to say. Then he saw the lamp and said, Can you help me with that thing?
The knock that came a few minutes after Elisha left was barely au- dible. Come in, he said, not sure if he should go to the door.
Her hand appeared first, gripping the edge of the door, then her arm, covered in black, then her face. She couldnt have been more than eighteen, and perhaps not even that, he thought, as she came all the way into the room and closed the door. She was at most seven- teen. Maybe sixteen. Jesus fucking Christ, she might be fifteen.
Hi, he said, standing up. The room was too hot: hed stoked the fire until it was raging, pushing in most of his wood, so hed probably be freezing later.


She folded her hands over her stomach and looked like she wanted to run, but instead she stepped quickly over to him and put her hand on his chest. She was more than a foot shorter than Jacob, her hair in a thick brown braid down her back. In all his fantasies hed imag- ined some demurely beautiful woman, but this girl was plain, almost dowdy, with a wide nose and a gap between her front teeth. Standing in front of him, she was breathing hard, panting, almost, and her cheeks were flushed.
Im Jacob, he said.
Rising up on tiptoes, she tried to kiss his mouth, but he pulled away. I dont think, he started, but saw her face harden.
Here, she said, stepping out of her shoes and climbing onto the bed. She hoisted her skirt, lifting her butt to get it all the way up.  She had on nothing underneath. Her pubic hair was a light brown, tinged with red.
Look, I think, he started.
Thats when he heard something just outside the door. A man, coughing.
The girl on the bed just stared at him and lifted her hips. He unbuckled his belt, pushed down his pants, and climbed on top of her. He was as gentle as possible, fumbling for a while trying to get himself positioned, almost losing his erection, but then hed looked at her face and shed turned to him, and he slid in, watched her gasp, then roll her face away as he began to move.
As soon as hed finished she slipped out from under him, pulled on her shoes, and left the shed. He thought he heard her talking, but Jacob just rolled his face into his pillow. Tomorrow hed go home.
But he stayed. The next day he walked toward the more distant farms whose land pushed up against the sand hills. Beyond town he could see men working, leading horse-drawn wagons, repairing the roof of a shed, doing something to a silo. Back at the shed he had nothing to do, so he chopped the logs of wood stacked beside his barn, then moved on to those beside the house. Elishas wife brought him a bucket of warm water and a greasy bar of soap and shivering behind the shed he washed as best he could.
That night, his third, the knock came at the door after dinner. It


took him a minute to realize that the woman standing before him was the same as the night before.
Wait, I thought, he started, but stopped himself. But what had he thought? Of course it had to be the same girl.
She lay down and pulled up her dress, just like the night before.  I was wondering, he said, as he unbuckled his pants and pushed
them down over his erection. Maybe you could tell me your name. She blinked as if the idea had never occurred to her. Then she said,
Rebecca.
Hi, Rebecca. Im Jacob.
She rolled her face away from him, toward the wall.
Well, it was nice talking with you, he said, kneeling between her ankles, but he paused. How old are you?
Shhh, she whispered, reaching down and grabbing his dick.
The next morning, after breakfast, which Elishas wife left outside the door, Jacob followed a narrow dirt track to the rising slope of the hills where the fences ended. At some point he expected the ground to turn to sand, like at the beach, but instead the crumbly dirt got grittier, looser, the low, yellow grass sparser. Why hadnt he brought water? When he looked up, panting, he saw nothing in every direction but the billowing swells of the hills, the shuddering yellow grass. The sun was straight up overhead, so he couldnt tell which way was east and after wandering a little, he sat down and waited for the sun to drop. By the time he was able to start back his shadow stretched, long and thin in front of him and the wind had turned sharp out of the north. He ended up too far south and had to trudge along the edge  of the hills until he found the cow trail. By the time he reached his shed his lips were cracked, his face red and burned, his ears throbbed from the cold wind, and his hands were numb. He drank the ceramic pitcher of water and lay down in the dark.
The knocking didnt wake him that night, and he only drifted out of sleep when Rebecca poked his shoulder. Wake up, she said. She lit the lamp beside the bed and he covered his eyes with his forearm. What? Jacob said, forcing himself up on an elbow. What are
you doing?
Im here, Rebecca said, folding her arms across her chest.


No, Jacob said, collapsing back against his pillow. Not tonight. I, she started, then after a pause, no, you
Get out, he shouted. He could tell she was standing above him still. Get the fuck out of here, he shouted, louder, and this time he heard her hurried steps, the door slam. There might have been voices outside and the door might have cracked open, a head peering in at him, then the door closed with a click.

Rebecca was surely still here, in the community, he realized now as he drove out to the edge of the town, and then did a five point to turn to start back out toward the road. Shed be in her thirties now, but with the cold and wind and working the fields shed look older, older by far than Sheila with her faint wrinkles and pale skin. Rebecca probably already looked like an old woman. Presumably shed been married off and raised the child. His child. Except he didnt really think that. He knew that having a kid wasnt just a matter of shoot- ing your wad.
He slowed until he was barely moving, hoping to see something in the womens faces that would spark a memory of Rebecca, or maybe something of himself in a young man, taller than the rest, with dusty blond hair, a strong jaw, big shoulders. The young man would be pushing a wheelbarrow in front of one of the white houses and hed glance up as the battered car rolled past. Through the dusty wind- shield, theyd see each other.
Hed turned Rebecca away the fifth night as well, and the next morning Elisha had came to talk to him. Was there anything wrong? Was he uncomfortable?
Jacob was lying on his bed, his arms behind his head. Of course not. He was fine.
Elisha considered him carefully, rubbing his white beard. Then he said that it was important to remember that Jacob had been brought here for a job. This was a job they had hired him to do. They had agreed to pay him good money for his services.
My services? Thats what you call it? He sat up and took pleasure in seeing the old man flinch.
Please, Elisha said, holding his hands out, cooperate with us.


Right, fine, Jacob said. No problem. Ill cooperate.
That night Rebecca came at the regular time and he was standing naked just inside the door so the wind made his skin prickle.
Are you ready? he said. Because Im all set to cooperate. How about you?
Shed stayed by the door. He told her to come closer. Closer. When she was nearly up against him he started to unbutton her shirt. She grabbed at the flaps of her shirt, trying to fit them back together, but he stopped her hands and told her to behave. He slid the shirt off, then unlatched her skirt and pushed it over her hips. Trembling in her heavy bra that looked more like a bandage and her wide, sagging underpants, she started to cry. He turned her around and eventually figured out how to undo the bra, so that her small, high breasts were free. He ran his thumbs over her pink nipples, watching her face, but she only looked afraid. Then he pushed down her underwear and pulled her to the bed. She lay down on her back, eyes clenched shut. He knelt above her, looking down at her pale, trembling body, then he grabbed her hips. She let out a cry as he turned her over, lifted her ass up, her face in his pillow. Unlike the other nights he didnt finish quickly, held himself back, drawing it out. At first he was angry, but the longer it went on, the more he wanted her to let go of herself for just a second, to moan, to rock her hips back into him, but she didnt make a sound, even when he reached around and rubbed her clitoris. When he finally came she climbed quickly out of bed and dressed. She left the door hanging open behind her so he had to get up to close it against the cold.
Behind a house, framed by a large red barn, a woman was hang-
ing laundry. It wasnt Rebecca. He hoped she never thought of him, but he doubted that was true. Or maybe not. Maybe this kind of life purified her mind, sloughed away all the nostalgia and grasping after youth that was so much a part of his own life.
The last night, his seventh, she came to the shed as usual. All day hed been trying to think what to say when she arrived, because even after what hed done the night before, he knew shed come. What choice did she have? And he had to say something, but all he could come up with was, Im sorry. I didnt mean to hurt you, worry you,


frighten you. Those were bullshit, but there was no way he could get at the truth, because he didnt have any idea what it might be. Still, he had to say something. He couldnt leave her with the idea that the father of her child, her baby, was a bastard.
When she came into the room she stared down at her hands. Come here, he said, patting the mattress. Come sit next to me
for a minute.
She wouldnt look at him, and he could tell form the tenseness of her posture, and the way she leaned away when she sat down, that she hated him. With good reason.
I want, he started, but then couldnt think of anything to say.  He just stared at her profile, at the slight puffiness of her lips, the perfectly straight line of her nose, her thick eyebrows, which were probably not thicker than other women, but she didnt pluck them.
I wanted to talk to you, he said. All right, she said. Talk.
I mean, he said, forcing out a fake laugh. I mean, I barely know your name, you know? And you dont know anything about me.
She looked at him for the first time, a brief glance.
I mean, considering all this, he gestured at her stomach, dont you want to know anything? I mean, anything about me.
She shook her head, then said, What should I know?
I dont know. What do you want to know? Anything. You can ask me anything.
She pursed her lips, frowned and said, All right. What do you want to do? What kind of work do you want to do?
Like anyone else, this was almost all hed thought about during college, but like almost everyone else he knew, he didnt have an answer.
I guess Id like to be a teacher, he said. She looked at him. A teacher?
Yes. High school, I think. Or little kids. Either one. What would you teach?
History, he said. This was the first time hed even considered this, but as soon as he said it, he knew it was true. This was what he would do. He was already majoring in history. So why not?


What history?
He laughed and said, Any kind. American. American history. She seemed to be considering this, then shrugged. Okay.
See, isnt that better? he said. Now you know something about me. Come on. Ask me something else. Anything else.
I dont know.
Come on. Anything, he said, and he wanted to touch her,  to  take her hand, to hug her, but instead he just bounced on the bed, making the springs squeal. She shook with the bounce, and he did it again, then again, and her smile widened.
Still bouncing he leaned over and whispered, Come on, help me out. At first she didnt move, just sat there, shaken by his movements, and then she lifted her butt and brought it down and they went on like that, bouncing the bed, the springs wailing. A few strands of her hair, which had been tied up in a bun, drifted loose around her face, catching in her half-open mouth. She left just as she always did, not looking back at him, and he lay down on the bed that seemed to still be vibrating and he closed his eyes, trying to hold on to that feeling. He drove back through the community as quickly as he could.
Sheila and Janey were probably wondering where hed gone. Theyd drive back to that diner, sit in a booth, play music from the little jukebox on the wall, and tomorrow the car would be ready, and they could finally get out of there and head back home.

Lisa has rules: a movie, but thats all; a dinner, but thats all; a walk somewhere, a show, a drink out, but thats all. Im trying to find a way to break her limits. Tonight she wanted to swim. Were on the bay side of the island where the waters are easy and the sand thick as mud. You can step in spots and lose your legs in a minute, sinking  up to your knees. Weve been here an hour and Im out and dry, but shes still skimming the surface like a bug, pulling herself farther and farther out and then dipping from sight. Im in sinking sand trying to sink as far as I can. The lights of town blink on and off in the waters reflection. The smell of fry oil dwells in the air.
You going to Pachecos after this? she calls, treading far out, her voice thin against the wind and carried away.
I tell her no, Im going to her house.
I saw him trying to surf last weekend, she says. He got so pissed off he broke his board. On her back, she begins a slow swim in.
I wasnt with him, I say.
Hes kind of stupidly violent, she says. Are you two still going to the empty houses?
Sometimes we go, I say. You should come. Its fun.
A salty wind sticks to my body and I watch her going under and coming up. A few minutes later she gets to shore cast in orange-brown light. A quiet splashing. The suns like a dying bulb seen through a bottle of whiskey, cloudy and flickering through clouds.


Im gone, she says, stepping through tide pools warm and clear.
Times up, she says.
This is ridiculous, I say.
She stands in one large tide pool and sinks down some and I toss a towel and watch the way her reflection is continuously sliced and rebuilt on the rippling water.

Pacheco has three new surfboards and can barely stay up. He lives in this bungalow near the beach and is selling the house he and his wife lived in. Shes been gone two years and is so much less than a memory for me, only a name; for Pacheco, I cant say. The wind here whips off the sea, the sky a raucous hot summer blue with blooming blue clouds, but the waves are shit. Pacheco goes out every day and tries. He shows me the bruises, the sand-scraped skin. He tells people he lives in a beach house and surfs and smokes pot because its better than having a life. I dont know what this means, but I go see him. Its what Im supposed to do.
This is what we do: we find whos vacationing, then we break in. We dont steal, we only use: their food, their cable, their computers. We get to live some other life a minute, be who we want to be.
Pachecos stretched out on a leather sofa, sunburnt and thin. Were playing Scrabble in the Parkers home, an older couple whore up north for the summer: its a dark, damp place, with condensation on the windows and no air-conditioning so it feels and smells like being in a crotch. Out the back windows is a deck, and beyond, the ocean, a full moon above it. People shuffle by on the beach, flashlights lighting like holy lamps, searching out sea turtles. Im here and abiding until I leave for home and get to think about how to break Lisas limits.
Tofu, I say, arranging the squares on the board. Fifteen points.
I need something very definite and dramatic to happen, Pacheco says. I need to throw these Scrabble pieces across the room and yell, You all fucked my life.
Please dont, I say. Im winning and this isnt your house.
Two years ago, he told me his wife fucked some other guys. I later found out she just started playing racquetball and going swimming. I told Pacheco this and all he said was, Is that really what you think of me? She lives alone now; she could be anywhere.


I need a new mountain bike, he says, disregarding Scrabble. I think that would fill some need.
Your turn, I say.
If not a mountain bike, then watching someone drown.
Hes brought a speed bag and has it hanging from a doorframe and he goes to it and smacks it with quick punches, running it against his fists. Outside, the flashlights move up and down the beach. He has the bag thrumming, humming quick to his hands. With a hard right, he smacks the bag so it clutters and viciously bounces. Hes mixed martial arts; my father tried to teach me to box when I was younger and then tried to watch boxing with me when  I  got  older  and I  now get to regret not doing either. Pacheco turns and comes back to Scrabble. He flings a pillow from the sofa which I block. It hits the coffee table and nearly knocks over a vase.
Be careful, I say. I have a smoothie machine you can borrow, I say.
A smoothie fills many of my needs.
Letting me borrow your truck will do it for me, he says. Sold, I say. Your play.
Do other people want to see other people ruined? he says. You like making us something were not, I say.
Later, with the house still dark and humid and outside great palm leaves shuffling in the wind, he  says: Look at  me.  Thirty years old. I have sixty dollars in the bank. Do you realize were still children?
Outside, the oceans a constant hushing echo. The flashlights have stopped and the moon hangs above the ocean, a sick cloudedness.
I want you to bring that Lisa girl around, he says.
Cant, I say. She dislikes you. She more than dislikes you. She doesnt know me, he says.
I cant be around him more  than a  few  hours. I  tell him I  have to go and he tells me he wants to test our balance, which means he wants to do this kind of wrestling: he clears out the Parkers living room so nothing breaks; we match right feet up, each with a left foot back, a wide stance for balance; our left hands are free, our right hands joined; low to the ground, calves and hamstrings burning. Go, he says. We try to throw each other off balance. First to move a foot loses. His right hand crushes mine, pushes me back, and my weight


swings to my back left leg, then he pulls me toward him, my whole body shifting to my front right leg and Im done and down on him and were in a pile on the floor. Again, he says. You can do better than that shit.
I lose, lose, lose, and after each time I go down I want to break a vase across his face.
When I get up to go, Im sweating and he gives me a Gatorade from the Parkers fridge. He says, I do need to borrow your truck on Tuesday. Ill give you money. I hold the sweaty Gatorade; he  feels he has to pay and I agree he probably does. I  give him what  he wants.

Some other night I drive over to Lisas late after work. Ive closed the restaurant down and prepped for the morning. The golf course spar- kles under the water of sprinklers. An old man walks his dog along the beach road and the quiet here is more than some can be com- fortable with. The beach houses facing the ocean seem like broad- foreheaded men, looking out for some ungettable thing.
At Lisas, shes got the Ping-Pong table set up in her living room. This means that after a best of seven in Ping-Pong, Im going home.  I get a Coke from the fridge and she bounces the Ping-Pong ball on her paddle, following me. Shes got this bandana in her hair, a pair of sweatpants on, a T-shirt of a bunny holding a machete.
You with Pacheco? she says. Nope, I say.
She gets on her tiptoes to turn off the ceiling fan and her T-shirt stretches up, shows me her stomach, a ring in her belly button. I flip on the lights, pull the blinds. Her apartment is spare, a white room with new cream carpet. Little carpet ball fluff. Shes big into coffee and has used mugs out on tables, the TV, the mantel. Shes told me theres a kind of coffee bean that has to be found in the shit of a goat for it to taste right. The goat has to eat it. I was confused until I real- ized the goat didnt actually chew the bean. Shes told me this with such passion, such knowing want.
We unfold the table, play three games, four. The crack and pong  of the ball fills the room. Im up threeone, so I let her catch me by


knocking backhands to her forehand so she can convert. And she does. I have this vision of a life with her. I want to stay.
Dont let me win, she says. Im not, I say.
Its patronizing, she says.
Would it be patronizing if I said I was letting you win because I wanted to be around you longer?
Yes, she says. I think.
It gets to threetwo, threethree, then I win the last game. We fold the table back up. She turns the ceiling fan back on. Ill see you tomorrow at work, she says.
This is ridiculous, I say. Tomorrow at work, she says.
A man comes from the apartment upstairs and knocks on her door and then comes right in. Lets watch a movie, he says. This is Fred, who does not matter at all to me.
Yeah, I say. Im tired. I dont want to drive. Lets all watch a movie. Ive got some new Netflix, Fred says.
Freds got Netflix, I say.
Lisa looks at me: Your time is up, she says. Fred, if you want to stick in that movie, go ahead.
I stay standing in the pale family room, Fred unsure if he should start setting up the movie or not. Lisa moves her body across the room, turns around in the kitchen in socked feet, her legs crossing. Crosses her arms across her chest. Ill see you  tomorrow,  she  says to me, then spins on the kitchen floor again and walks to the back bedroom.
Good night, Fred says to me with a stupid grin.

Its a Thursday night and Pacheco wants to go to the Heights, this part of the resort town that huddles the golf course. We drive, win- dows open, the damp smell of salty air. Palm trees line the main roads. Spanish moss swings from everything. I once dropped a pile of the moss on Pachecos bed to make him suffer some. He gave me   a black eye for it. This was when Molly was around. Molly with the great swinging breasts and the terribly pale face, as if carved from


wax. She liked Pacheco more around other people. I dropped moss on their bed when I learned Pacheco had been filching my dope. The moss has these bugs in it, you understand.
We get to the office. Pachecos got the desperate eyes for Lisa, but  I make him wait in the car.
Ask her to come with, he says to me out the car window. I pretend I dont hear him and go in.
She sits at her desk, tells me which homes are vacant. Shes got on the work clothes: white starched collared shirt, black suit pants. Her hair is amazingly straight, like crazily impossibly straight and black. Try the Meyers, she says. Theyre gone for three weeks.
Itd be easier if you gave me the key, I say.
Id give you a key if you werent doing this for him. You should be nicer to Pacheco, I say.
He should stop being such a whiner, she says. Hes got a temper. Hes harmless, I say. He could use somebody paying him some at-
tention. Really. Itd be nice if you at least let him know you see him.
How the fuck old are you two? she says. You think youre using him, she says. Hes using you.
Were all using somebody, I tell her. Thats something they would say in a movie, right?
And then youd walk out that door and tip your hat at me and maybe wink.
Then youd give me a blow job.
Oh, that one has me, she says. That one definitely has me joining you morons.

At nine, we pick up Lisa and the sitting in the car gets confusing. Pacheco doesnt realize he needs to let Lisa sit up front, so I have to tell him, and in that time Lisa says, No, no, Ill just sit in the back   and let you boys give each other hand jobs. Pacheco looks at me and   I dont regard him. I want to smack him. Lisa kind of lounges across the entire backseat. Not in work clothes; shes got this sort of library thing going on. She texts on her phone and I imagine it must be Fred, the guy who lives above her apartment. I found myself falling in love with her leather anklet one day, then her legs, then her jean shorts and


frayed edges, Ping-Pong, cruelty, rules, and then, once I noticed Fred, everything else.
We should just go to the Meyers first, Lisa says from the back. I got something else to do tonight. You boys only get two hours of my time.
Thats not how it works, Pacheco says.
The first house is a stone ranch Pacheco picks out. My dad lived   in one like it. We wait a few houses down from this ranch. We see people out walking dogs, lights in houses going off and on,  figures in windows, all these lives going by quiet. I like the sitting part, the waiting part. The waiting part, the part right before you touch the door handle and it comes open, thats almost as good as being inside. I used to like coming home to my dads house and being the only  one up. Up at three a.M. and listening to the house do its breathing, quietly walking by his room, some woman over. Now the house is empty and I dont know what to do with it.
I need to be a lawyer or a doctor, Pacheco says.
Lisa rolls down her window, rolls it up, rolls it down. She stretches out and all I can see of her are her delicate feet hanging out a window. That anklet.
I always wanted to work in an office building, I say. Where there is a clearly defined thing I always have to do and then instead of doing it, falling asleep in the supply closet.
Instead youre a chef, Lisa says.
I need to save people from serious life dangers, then betray them, Pacheco says.
Instead you work in a bank, Lisa says.
When were done waiting, Pacheco goes. His skinny figure ducks around the back of the dark house. How he was ever in mixed mar- tial arts is incomprehensible. Yet hes put me in a hold I could not escape from and took my breath and put me to sleep. A minute later Pachecos back in the car.
Nope, he says.
Some houses have a key hidden, a window open, an easily picked lock. Not all of them though, not even most of them. Were persis- tent. Were that bored.


We find a two-story angel, a pink thing, lightless inside. No way in. Then: a brick job with a window everywhere, but nothing. Finally, a castle, some kind of pillar sticking up where a fireplace might be. Its the Meyers, the first one on Lisas list.
Your turn, Pacheco says.
I check the door then under everything: the flowered mat, the pots of flowers, the bench leg, then in the mulch beneath a couple rocks.   I go around back. Theres a pool back there, skinned with leaves. Theres a sliding glass door, patio furniture, and this fake statue in blackface. I check under him and were in.
See, Lisa says.

We make drinks; open the cupboards; spread out cheese and meats and bread thats not bad yet. We light up the big-screen and keep the lights down or off. These places, theyve got dimmers usually, and we sit in half-dark. A good silence sweeps up through our hearts and were kings and a queen in a minute. Even Lisa goes around admir- ing, grinning. We use the good china thats propped up on little plate-stands in glass cupboards. I rub the rim of my glass and make it sing. How these people live is unfathomable, the depths of their joys and sorrows or the lack thereof. The house makes us better: we share our food, our wine, we clean our messes, we put the toilet seat up, we wash our hands, we do the dishes, we put away the food, we arrange everything as it was. One thing, though, we change. Weve turned paintings upside down; weve switched vases on end tables; weve moved jewelry from jewelry case to nightstand; weve left a shoe in the middle of the room; weve left the television on; weve put a pair of her panties in his sock drawer. We leave a bit of ourselves behind. I wish I could say this was my idea, but it was Pachecos. My idea was to smoke a joint and leave that smell in the house.
Lets change all the candles, Lisa says. Switch places.
Later, we get bored and the house is a house. It always goes like this. Pacheco says, I want to ruin these peoples life. Hes taking down a joint, the smoke clouding up the room. Hes lying stretched out on the floor, Im on the sofa, Lisas at the window watching the leaf-lined pool.


Defecating on their bed would ruin their life, Lisa says. I have to get going, boys. Your time is up.
I want her sickeningly. Im tired of Pacheco and him being there at all, him even existing at all.
Defecating on their bed might scare them, but not ruin them, I say. Youd have to do something way more drastic.
I wish we were animals, Pacheco says. I cant play this way any- more.
You dont have the moxie, Lisa says. Were not men of action, I say.
Youre passive men, she says. And as a woman, Im the one whos just here. This life is not for us, were just guests in it.
We have no moxie, I say.
Speak for your fucking selves, Pacheco says. Please, I say. Youre the worst.
He passes me the joint, eyes all swampy and sad. I wonder what happens if we get caught, he says.
Thats more like it, I say.
We cant get caught, Lisa says. Me and him are employees.

I go to the bathroom, the master bathroom, up three stories, which has a Jacuzzi and a kind of sauna, but not to go to the bathroom,  just to get away from Pacheco. The master bed is a four-poster with  a thousand pillows. Like my fathers. My father used to box and he tried teaching me. He built his house, he had an earlier marriage an- nulled, he didnt cheat on his women, he invested his money well, he had a broken nose from boxing in college, he fell asleep driving home from the coast and wrecked his car and killed himself. I got some money and the house. Sitting there on the four-poster is like sitting in the dream of the life I wish I wasnt living. I turn on the ceiling fan, thinking thats amusing.

Its three stories I have to descend to the basement. I go  through each room  and want  to  never  leave.  When I  get  to  the basement, I hear hard voices, and at the bottom of the stairs I see Pachecos skinny figure in the dark atop Lisa. Shes telling him to get the fuck


off her and Pachecos got her in some kind of hold and shes getting louder, telling him that hes hurting her.
You said you want to see what I do, Pacheco says. You want to know what mixed martial arts is.
Get the fuck off me, she says. Hes got her pinned, knees atop her chest, a forearm at her throat. Ive never been that close to her. Her legs are kicking air. Her face is red, veins cutting through her neck.
I stand at the bottom steps and back up one step and feel some  flip in my stomach, some sick excitement, something that feels like when you slip off the high dive, when you think you might miss and yet somehow know no matter what youll hit water even if you hit board first. In a mument, Ill go in there and push him off her. In a day, Lisa will not talk to me anymore. In a month, she will not see me anymore. In a year, shell be a memory, another person I get to regret the losing of. But not yet. I stand motionless and needful to make this last.
This is what I do, Pacheco says. Do you see? he says.
Do you want me to let you up? he says.


I like looking at pictures of Gwen Stefani. I do not need to  know any more about Gwen Stefani than that she looks really good in red lipstick. Looking at pictures of Gwen Stefani in red lipstick with pale skin and pale hair and a white tank top and a baby on her hip provides as much information as I feel I need about Gwen Stefani  in order to imagine Gwen Stefani in the way that I want to imagine her. Very occasionally, I like listening to Gwen Stefani, but listening to Gwen Stefani does not affect the way I look at Gwen Stefani and what I get out of looking at Gwen Stefani. When I look at Gwen Stefani in her red lipstick I think maybe I should try red lipstick one more time, just to be sure, though really I know the truth, and my red-lipstick desires are almost fully satisfied by looking at pictures of Gwen Stefani. All that said, had Gwen Stefani never come into my line of sight, the likelihood is high that I would not feel that anything was missing.
I like looking at photographs of New York City in the 1960s and 70s to see if they remind me of something I forgot. I like looking at old advertisements. I like looking at B movies on Spanish language channels. I like looking at some of your pictures on Facebook, even when I dont know you. I like looking at your bookshelves. I like

I  Like Look ing at  Pictures of Gwen Stefani	261

looking at everything in hardware stores and stationery stores. I like looking at my grandmothers sewing machines when I go  out  to  the garage; they look like snazzy old cars, though they each weigh about forty pounds, I dont know if they work, and I only ever look at them when Im looking for something else. I like looking at tall shoes that cost a thousand dollars. I like looking at two men kiss- ing. I like the slightly electronic thwacking sounds of the automated postal machine, which I suspect could have been made to be silent but were made to have this sound so that the user might feel a sense of accomplishment, a certainty of delivery, and which could have been any sound, a bell, or a chime, but which was decided, f inally to be a thwack. I like the sound of Car Talk in the background on Saturday mornings more than I have a regular need for the content of the program. I like seeing old maps on your wall. I like seeing  old black men wearing hats so much. I like seeing bodegas, though I rarely go in. I like looking at sculptures by Jeff Koons. I like look- ing at street art, sometimes, like when they cover lampposts and things with sweaters. I like looking at craft websites. I like to look at my craft supplies. I like to look at your craft supplies and see how theyre organized so much more interestingly and efficiently than my craft supplies. I like to look at numbers. I like looking at the same old brownstones again and again and again. I like look- ing at old warehouses with broken windows surrounded by vacant lots f illed with weeds and rabbits. I like looking at Girls Gone Wild commercials in the middle of the night when I cant sleep, the ones on network TV with the body parts blurred out. I like looking at videos of awkward twelve-year-old boys lip-syncing and dogs and puppies and cats and kittens and anteaters and anteater babies and unlikely animal friends.
Some  of  these things I  would  like in my  house,  some  not,  al-
though mostly thats beside the point. At f irst I thought I should simply say I look at these things, instead of I like to look at these things, but because I look at them for as long as I do, or as often as  I do, I have decided that I must like looking at them, otherwise why wouldnt I look away? I dislike looking at as many things or more, women  in dresses with only one  sleeve, new  subdivisions with  no

262	Elizabeth Crane

trees, anything Im told is intended to be shocking, grisly things in movies, the trash that blew onto your lawn, and the big gray sky. I dislike the word ugly, the sound, the meaning, the implication, though it is occasionally useful in instances of describing a black- ness of heart. There may or may not be rhyme or  reason to  any of it. Sometimes I try to wish these things away that I do not like and there they still are.


She was in the claw-foot tub. She was in there with her flesh and her bones and some suds, reading a book of stories. Ivy Coldwater was her name. She had a short glass of beer on the yellowing tile floor beside one of the claw feet. She took a sip of beer and set the book, spine up, on the side of the tub. She sank low into those suds. Ivy figured if the world ended right then, and wouldnt that just be the way, shed at least be clean and only slightly tipsy.
She wondered how the world would end. She thought maybe a flood. It would just rain and rain some more, carpet tacks and car- penters nails, the great sky unsheathed. And then Ivy Coldwater, of general delivery, Prophet, Mississippi, would float away in her claw- foot tub, on the currents whims, to heaven or hell or the swamps of Louisiana.
Ivy loved claw-foot tubs. Once, as a little girl, she saw one walk across the bathroom floor. This was in the big house on Peabody Avenue, up in Memphis, before her daddy became a white-collar criminal and was sent to country-club prison and her mama took up with God and lost her sense of joy and wonder.
The tub took three steps on its claw feet and then seemed about to break into a run. But it did not. Tub water sloshed and then settled as the claw-foot tub hunkered anew. No more did it move. The tub seemed enormously proud of itself, still and all.


When Ivy drew a picture of what shed  seen,  the tub was up  on  its hind legs, dancing something like the Dog. Bathwater was up to the tubs anklesIvy had given ankles to those claw feet and short lengths of shapely legs, too, and a body that bowed and swayed. Ivy had seen her mama dance the Dog with a perfect stranger.
The picture of the dancing tub was crayon on paper plate. Ivy was a girl of eight, already an artist.
Why, Ivy, her mama said when she saw it. Thats a lovely picture. It really happened, Mama, Ivy said. Swear to Jesus.
Swearing was much the fashion in the big house on Peabody Avenue those days, most all of it sweet in nature. Ivys mama swore to God and Jesus and the ghosts of soldiers, to the local law, Rock City and the House of Bourbon. Shed swear to whichever singer was singing on those records she always played. Shed stub her toe or spill a swish of drink and swear to Fats Waller. She loved sly talkers, blues shouters. She loved the old stuff.
Well, that is something, Ivys mama said with joy and wonder and a voice like song itself. She had black hair bobbed like a flapper girls and she carried a martini glass she used as an ashtray. Why, girl, Id never seen that tired ol tub take moren three steps and stop.
This was all before Ivys mama went sane and stopped dancing the Dog with perfect strangers and grew her hair out straight and let it go natural; now her hair was the color of the mouse that lived under Ivys kitchen sink. This was all before Ivys mama took to wearing loose dresses and low heels and before she quit gin and cigarettes and banished Fats and every one of his sly-talking cronies to the crawl space of her mind.
Ivy!
The window over the tub was open and so she could hear her mamas voice from the sidewalk below. Ivy could hear her mamas voice from underwater. Ivy reckoned she could float clear to the swamps of Louisiana, to the great ocean beyond, the vastness there, and hear her mamas voice over the awful racket of the world ending. She slipped down into the water again. She imagined what her mama was out there shouting. She well could guess. Her mama was saying, Now, you get out of that tub and put on a loose dress and some low heels and come to church with me, girl.


Ivy was not a girl. She was a full-grown woman of thirty-three and a third, like those old records her mama used to play. She was the age her mama was when her mama went sane.
Hey down there, Mama, Ivy finally shouted back, after shed come up from under the suds. She wondered if she was going to go sane, too. She did not think she could cope with the world if that were to happen. The world was in the pisser, pretty much, was Ivys view of the world. The varnish was off the old place. It was shabby and worn and starting to smell, bit of rankness about. Maybe it really was about to end. Maybe it already had but the government was keep- ing it hush-hush and the newspapers had not caught wind. Ivy sighed and waited for what her mama would say next.
Hurry now, girl, she said. We going to be late for church.
Ivys mamas way of talking had taken a turn for the country after she found religion. It was as if God was just a bit of a hick himself, and so was naturally suspicious of that uptown city grammar.
Come on up, Mama, Ivy said. Doors unlocked. Im not going   to church but youre welcome to come in and hound me some.
Ivy didnt know why there needed to be church on Wednesday.   She didnt know what the Lord needed with a second day. The Lords ways and means were much on her mind. She sighed some more. She took a sip of beer and set the glass by the claw foot. She stood and looked out the window. Suds dripped from her skin and her bones and onto that book of stories. She had been reading one about a man who takes his son to the mountains. They werent going up there to fish.
Ivy shook her head at her mamas loose dress and low heels and her straight hair the color of a poor kitchen mouse. And she remem- bered her mama in that flapper girl hair and that martini glass that had cigarette ashes in it even when she was using it to drink marti- nis. Ivy remembered her mama dancing the Dog with that perfect stranger and wondered whatever did become of him. Maybe hed gone to country-club prison, too, on account of the scam hed tried to pullselling the Coldwaters own house to Ivys mama, and get- ting as far as her signing certain legal documents before they com- menced to dancing and then to other things. Maybe he was cell mates with Ivys daddy. Maybe they passed the days talking about a woman theyd both known, black-haired and tipsy-wild, loved to hear Fats


Waller sing All That Meat and No Potatoes. Maybe they wondered how she was getting on, what she was doing, wherever she was. Ivy wondered, too.
Ivy missed her daddy some, but she missed her mama more.

Hey there, Mama.
Mother, her mama said, as if even country folk with their hick grammar ought to carry forth with some small bit of dignity in the eyes of God and small-town Mississippi. Ivys mama walked into the house as she always did, with suspicion, as if she might be set upon by beggars or addicts or God forbid some artists. And hurry, she said. We be late.
Lates when youre dead, Mama, Ivy said. Youll be there when you get there and they can wait or go ahead on. Besides, you know every word Preacher Mulls going to say before he says it.
His name aint Preacher Mull, Ivy.
The preachers name was Mill, but  Ivy called him Mull because he couldnt wish you a blessed day without worrying over it first. Ivy didnt blame him, for he was young and did not know his own mind, much less have the audacity, the gall, to stand before a congregation and tell its members what to think and how to think it, though they had come for that very purpose.
Mother, her mama said yet again. I preferher voice turned country-formalto be called Mother. And hurry it, girl.
You can be the Queen of Soul, if you like. But I dont  go  to church on Sunday, so I damned sure am not going on a Wednesday. Mama, Mama, Mama.
Ivy stood in the kitchen doorway in an old bathrobe that was yel- lowing like those bathroom tiles. She had left her beer beside the claw foot. She wished that tub would up and bring it to her. Maybe she could train it, like with a dog. Teach it tricks and dance steps and basic household chores, like dusting and straightening and bringing her beer to her. If it could only go a few steps, all well and fine. Shed meet it halfway. She was a reasonable woman.
Ivy sighed. Her hair was sopping. It was short and black but she could not get it to look like her mamas used to. Her hair was not to


be tamed. It draped wild down in her dark eyes, and, doing so, drove men of the region to bold acts. They wanted to steal cars for her, bilk corporations, break banks, turn those Tunica County, Mississippi, casinos back to cotton fields with their slick card playing and call it White Christmas. And in that way, Ivys was much like her mamas used to be. But Ivy had pretty well had it with men. One had left her for the war and another for professional baseball and one was a rock n roll star who sang songs of her on the radio. (Worth noting: A man had never left Ivy for another woman.) But Ivy didnt think the world was ending just on account of she couldnt hold a man. Men were the least of it. There were the women and children, tooall of humankind, really, and their general petty nature, their bickering and instigating, their trifling ways and shiftless means, their bone- meanness, and the way they drove like their cars were the only rocket ships in the sky, and how theyd shoot one another over a chicken wing or  a  rib bone,  how  they liked to  draw blood, just generally.   It was everything, really. It took an Act of God to get them to act half-civil to one another. And then theyd fall all over themselves, ass over casseroles, to help a neighbor. A hurricane would do it. A flood would.
I sure did hate to hear about the levees, Ivy said, feigning neigh-
borly human concern. Heres you a covered dish. What, Ivy?
Nothing, Mama, she said, and thought about  that phrase, Act of God.
She went to the refrigerator for another beer. Ivy drank Schlitz, like Patsy Cline and Elviss mama, Gladys was her name, and James Earl Ray and lots of people, some good and some evil, nobody ever heard of. Ivy liked the taste of it, but mostly Ivy just believed in drinking cheap. Ivy believed in a good many things: drink cheap, think twice, sleep late, and never trust a man who carries his guitar by the neck like its a chicken hes just killed, were some of Ivys wisdoms.
That left a lot Ivy did not know, though, a lot for her to wonder over and ponder on. She had a wondering mind, Ivy Coldwater. She wondered, like for instance, if the eternal question wasnt so much Why? or Whats next? but Huh? Damned if Ivy Coldwater,


in her study of man, God, and the macrocosm, could divine a reason for it all.
Its a hell of a god, Ivy said now, whod act like that. Whats that, Ivy? her mama said. Whats that about God?
Why dont they call them Acts of the Devil? You know, hurri- canes and floods and the like, that earthquake they say were going to have. Every time theres a flood or something and somebody calls it an Act of God, I bet Gods got to pay the devil royalties. But Ivy did not believe in the devil. She thought he was made up and his story told to everyone so theyd be kind to one another and not grow up    to rob the First National Bank of Clarksdale or shoot their spouses over a chicken wing or a rib bone, though some of that bad stuff hap- pened, anyway, and some worsebut how much worse would it be, Ivy wondered, if people werent afraid of bein sent way down south to the land of shackles?
Ivy sang a little of the old Skip James blues, Devil Got My Woman. She sang, Id rather be the devil, than to be some womans man. Ivy could sing a little blues, all down low and scratchy, but she couldnt go up high and moan like only Skip James and some ghosts could do. Ivy was pretty sure she believed in ghosts, though in a straight-up practical sense it didnt matter whether she did or not: Ghosts believed in her. One night, late, she caught one taking a bath in the claw-foot tub, reading that book of stories. He was reading her Bible and singing, Jesus Is a Mighty Good Leader and Be Ready When He Comes. Ivy detected a sly mocking tone. She stood in the bathroom doorway in nothing but a Piggly Wiggly T-shirt and said, Are you real? But the ghost didnt say, just kept on reading and singing. He didnt seem to  notice  the near-naked woman standing in the doorway,  though he  did go  from I  Got to  Cross the River  of Jordan into a little snatch of the dirty blues number, Shes Got Jordan River in Her Hips, and back again. Then, without even look- ing up, the ghost slapped his thigh and laughed real big. You would have called it a guffaw. The next morning, Ivy thought shed dreamed it all, but there were six empty Schlitz cans on the floor beside the one claw foot and there was a ring about the tub. The Bible was open to Revelation, the bit about Jezebel on a bed of suffering.


There had been a time Ivy could have told her mama all about it, asked her what it meant, and theyd have settled in the parlor and pondered it together, over drinks and smokes. Theyd have had a good laugh themselves, the odd guffaw, and Ivys mama would have said something like, Why, I hadnt seen that ol ghost drink more than three beers and start looking for something to hump.
Ivy called her little sister Jess up in Memphis instead. Jess said, Maybe you werent his type. Jess was a scientist. She was trying to cure cancer at the cost of untold hundreds of mice. She didnt believe in God or ghosts and only half-listened to what Ivy said and then made as unpromising a reply as possible; she really had work to do, cancer to cure, mice to poison. Ivy said, You run across many men up in Memphis, Sis, that near-naked arent their type? Jess, who preferred to be called Jessica or better yet, Dr. Coldwater, did not say, one way or another.
I really have to go, Ivy, she finally said.
You know, Jess, Ivy said, sometimes I wonder  if youd  rather be poisoning people to save the mice. Because mice dont heap their petty bullshit on you. They dont burden you that way. They dont pull family rank on you.
Are you finished, Ivy?
Im just getting revved, I think, Jess. But I wont bother you any- more. Im sorry, about what I said just then. I am. Its justI dont know. Im no better than anybody else. Im marginally worse than most. Im a pain in the ass, I believes the technical term. But at least I can see that, can see it alllife itself, I meanfor what it is.
Silence on the other end of the line. Jess.
Jessica.
Lets get together real soon, have some beers and talk. What say, Sis? Ill meet you halfway.
You mean, like, Rosedale?
Ivy laughed and Jess seemed very nearly to join her. It was a mument, however small.
Yeah, Ivy said. What the hell, Rosedale.
But Jess had gone cold again. The flash of old times, of the girl the


woman used to be, passed, as flashes do. She said, I dont know, Ive. I, you know. I cant get away just now.
Silence again.
Good-bye, Dr. Jessica Coldwater, Ivy finally said. Tell Jess  I love her, still and all. Tell her I miss her, and Mama, too.
You always push things that little bit too far, Ivy, her sister said. You always did.

The devil is real, Ivys mama said now, as if she might have been reading her girls thoughts, as if doubts and wonderings were visible things, dust mites in the air or flies a-buzzing.
I know, Mama. And Jesus, hes a mighty good leader. Ivy thought of a couple of wordsbattle royalebut did not say them. She loved her mama, still and all.
Dont mock, her mama said. You need to get right, girl. You need to get you some of that old-time religion. She about broke into song, the way she said it.
Religion, Ivy thought. Thats the worst of it. Why couldnt  they just stop at faith? You could keep faith in your pocket, like a lucky stone or that quarter she had from her little-girlhood, smashed by the Pontotoc Rocket train as it made for Memphis. Nobody even had to know it was in there. Ivy Coldwater didnt have much faith, but it was hers and she kept it close.
Oh me of little faith, she said.

One other night, Ivy awoke and heard singing from down the hallway. There was not a soul or a ghost in the claw-foot tub, but in the kitchen at the table she saw Jesus, reading As I Lay Dying to the kitchen mouse. Or anyway, Jesus was reading it and the kitchen mouse was there, rapt as a thing can be that only knows to skitter and zag and flee, that knows no home but the lam and no art but the chase. Ivy stood in the doorway and listened for the longest time to the masters words, to the saviors melodic way with them. Ivy had forgotten what a funny book it was, for it being about a womans dying. She awoke the next morning curled in the doorway of the kitchen. The mouse was a foot away, its face scrunched and knowing, but mostly sad, it seemed.


You feeling low, little fella? Ivy  said.
The mouse did, in fact, look a little pink, what Ivys mama used to call peaked. Pee-kid, was how she said it.
Well, if its the cancer I can send you up to Memphis to my sister Jess. Shell finish you off. Wont hurt but a little bit.
The mouse skittered and zagged and fled.
This, though, was a dream. Unlike the ghost business, it had not happened except in the minds romp of our girls fitful sleep.

Mama, you know that story about God telling Abraham to take his son up to the mountains?
God was testing Abraham. God tests us all, Ivy.
Ive been reading that one. That and other stories. The Old Tes- tament, you know.
Youll like the New Testament better. Its nice. Jesus is there. Nice? Ivy about laughed. You make it sound like Gulf Shores,
Mama.
Oh, its nicer than all that, Ivy. There was something like slyness to the way she said it. Course, it dont matter where you find Jesus, so long as you do. It can be up in Memphis or down to Hattiesburg. I had a dream about him, Mama, Ivy said. Not the dream where he was reading Faulkner to that mouse, but a different dream.
I better not tell you more.
Ivys mama didnt pursue that bit about Faulkner and the mouse.
She just said, Its between you and your savior, daughter. Ivy said Woo-boy to that.

A week later, they were back in the kitchen. They were at it again. It was ritual now. It had become a religion of sorts, or anyway a service: There were holy rites and airings of the psalms, hymns, brimstone. There were tender muments and sometimes they laughed, though never at the same thing. Mostly they shouted across the gulf, the canyon, that had split the kitchen like the parlor act of some supreme being with too much of somethingtime, perhaps: damned eternity, anywayon its hands.
Ivy still was reading that story about Abraham taking his son up


to the mountains but not to fish. She kept reading and rereading it, could not shake it.
If you could just tell me that God was having a bad day, just that once, Id say all right, okay. Even God has a bad day, forgets himself. I guess Lincoln had days hed just bite heads for spite. That I could believe. I wouldnt even think all that less of God.
Ivys mama pondered this for the longest time.
God is God, Ivy, she finally said. I mean, hes God.

Time passed like a month of Wednesdays.
Ivy. Ivy. Whats so important you caint come to church with me? Her mama was making for the door; the woman clutched her purse as if some freshly unearthed religious artifact of the Delta region, the Shroud of Itta Bena or some such, were inside.
Im talking to you, Mama. Please. This is important. This is more religion than anything thats going to happen in that church of yours. I want to know. I need to know.
You asking does God talk to me, Ivy? Yes, Mama. And other things.
He does. Why, just this evening he said, Junie Coldwater, heres what I want you to do, daughter. I want you to go fetch that heathen artist girl of yoursIvy watched for some slight curve of lips, the hint of a smile, the falling away of years. But nothingand take her to church with you, if you got to carry her.
Mother, Ivy said, youre killing me.
Well, roll away the stone, girl, and come to church with me.

Ivys mama was back the next week and the week after and the weeks that followed. There were righteous pleadings and prophesies of doom. There were readings of the holy word. There was singing, crying. Bawling, really. It was about this time that the kitchen mouse moved out.
Ivy, did you hear me? her mama said now. Girl, are you drunk? But Ivy did not say. She was done with the arguing. She was think- ing. She was thinking shed get the big silver pail that was atop the re- frigerator and fill it with ice cubes and as many beers as it would hold


and tote the pail out back to the shack behind her little house and then paint and drink and listen to some old soul songs by the Staple Singers on the boom box, Ill Take You There and Heavy Makes  Me Happy, and see if there was a joint left in the tackle box and smoke it slow and get a little high, six feet or so, and look down at her- self as she painted. Ivy Coldwater had a wild, dripping brush for a left hand. She painted specters and visages and black polka dots, snatches of Bible verse, and old blues laments. Lately she painted Jesus, almost exclusively. She painted Jesus turning tin cans into tallboy beers. She painted Jesus dancing the Dog. Jesus in the claw-foot tub.
Youd call it sin and blasphemy so lets not go into it, Mama. Lets just say youre going to your church and Im going to mine.
Church, Ivys mama said.
Or anyway, religion. I think we all have our own, or ought to. Youve been drinking, Ivy.
Christ, Mama. Im free and legal and only slightly tipsy, so what if I am?
Ivys mama left in something like a huff. She may actually have said the word itself, huff, as she huffed away. She may have let slip with a harrumph, even. It was the closest she got to swearing, these days.
And Ivy, she repaired to the little shack out back, there with a fresh beer from the silver pail and a little bit of a joint, with her wild brush of a left hand dripping paint in bold hues, with her visages of a world about to croak in its sleep or drown on its own drool, one. And she thought, as she so often did in these last, dying days of ours, of Sweet Jesus.
She had so much to ask him. It might be days before theyd dance the Dog, weeks before shed have him in that claw-foot tub. Theyd just be together. Theyd just be. Theyd go on long drives to nowhere in Ivys blue pickup truck, wind up at some catfish shack and go inside. Theyd ask for a table in the back by the open window. Theyd just talk and talk and he might help her to understand every little thing and some of the big things, too. Theyd clink tallboy cans.  Hed squeeze lemon on her catfish. Hed have eyes as soulful as one of those old songs by the Staple Singers.




28.
In the Manner of Water or Light
by Roxane Gay


My mother was conceived in what would ever after be known as the Massacre River. The sharp smell of blood has followed her since. When she first moved to the United States, she read the dictionary from front to back. Her vocabulary quickly became extensive. Her favorite word is suffuse, to spread over or through in the manner of water or light. When she tries to explain how she is haunted by the smell of blood, she says that her senses are suffused with it.
My grandmother knew my grandfather for less than a day. Everything I know about my familys history, I know in fragments.
We are the keepers of secrets. We are secrets ourselves. We try to pro- tect each other from the geography of so much sorrow. I dont know that we succeed.

As a young woman, my grandmother worked on a sugarcane planta- tion in Dajabn, the first town across the border Haiti shares with the Dominican Republic. She lived in a shanty with five other women, all strangers, and slept on a straw mat beneath which she kept her rosary, a locket holding a picture of her parents, and a picture of Clark Gable. She spoke little Spanish so she kept to herself. Her days were long and beneath the bright sun, her skin burned ebony and her hair bleached white. When she walked back to her quarters at the end of each day, she heard the way people stared and whispered. They steered clear.


They were terrified by the absence of light around and within her. They thought she was a demon. They called her la demonia negra.
After saying her prayers, after dreaming of Port-au-Prince and lazy afternoons at the beach and the movie house where she watched Mutiny on the Bounty and It Happened One Night and The Call of the Wild, after dreaming of the warmth of Clark Gables embrace, my grandmother would tear her old dresses into long strips so she could better bind the cuts and scratches she earned from a long day in the cane fields. She would sleep a dreamless sleep, gathering the courage she would need to wake up the next morning. In a  different time, she had been loved by two parents, had lived a good life but then  they died and she was left with nothing and like many Haitians, she crossed over into the Dominican Republic in the hope that there, her luck would change.
My grandfather worked at the same plantation. He was a hard worker. He was a tall, strong man. My grandmother, late at night when she cannot sleep, will sit with a glass of rum and Coke, and talk about how her hands remember the thick ropes of muscle in his shoulders and thighs. His name was Jacques Bertrand. He wanted to be in the movies. He had a bright white smile that would have made him a star.
My grandmother is also haunted by smells. She cannot stand the smell of anything sweet. If she smells sweetness in the air, she purses her lip and sucks on her teeth, shaking her head. Today, when we drive to our familys beach property in Montrouis, she closes her eyes. She can stand neither the sight of the cane fields nor the with- ered men and women hacking away at stubborn stalks of cane with dull machetes. When she sees the cane fields, a sharp pain radiates across her shoulders and down her back. Her body cannot forget the labors it has known.
Now, the Massacre River is shallow enough to cross by foot, but in October 1937 the waters of what was the Dajabn River ran strong and deep. The unrest had been going on for daysDominican sol- diers determined to rid their country of the Haitian scourge went from plantation to plantation in a murderous rage. My grandmother did the only thing she could, burning through a long day in the cane


field, marking the time by the rise and fall of her machete blade. She prayed the trouble would pass her by.
It was General Rafael Trujillo who ordered  all the Haitians out  of his country, who had his soldiers interrogate anyone whose skin was too dark, who looked like they belonged on the other side of the border. It was the general who took a page from the Book of Judges to exact his genocide and bring German industry to his island.
Soldiers came to the plantation where my grandmother worked. They had guns. They were cruel, spoke in loud, angry voices, took liberties. One of the women with whom my grandmother shared her shanty betrayed my grandmothers hiding place. We never speak of what happened after that. The ugly details are trapped between the fragments of our family history. We are secrets ourselves.
My grandmother ended up in the river. She found a shallow place. She tried to hold her breath while she hid from the marauding sol- diers on both of the muddy shores straddling the river. There was a mument when she laid on her back, and submerged herself until her entire body was covered by water, until her pores were suffused with it. She didnt come up for air until the ringing in her ears became unbearable. The moon was high and the night was cold. She smelled blood in the water. She wore only a thin dress, plastered to her skin. Her feet were bare. When a bloated corpse slowly floated past her, then an arm, a leg, something she couldnt recognize, she covered her mouth with her hand. She screamed into her own skin instead of the emptiness around her.
Jacques Bertrand who worked hard and wanted to be in the movies found his way to the river that ran strong and deep. He moved him- self through the water until he found my grandmother. He tapped her on the shoulder and instead of turning away, she turned into him, opened that part of her herself not yet numb with terror. She found comfort in the fear mirrored in his eyes. His chest was bare and she pressed her damp cheek against his breastbone. She slowed her breathing to match his. She listened to the beat of his heart; it echoed beneath the bones of his rib cage. An angel, she told me. I thought he was an angel who had come to deliver me from that dark and terrible place.


My grandparents bound their bodies together as their skin gath- ered in tiny folds, as their bodies shook violently. Jacques Bertrand, who worked hard, who wanted to be in the movies, wrapped his arms around my grandmother. In a stuttered whisper, he told her the story of his life. I want to be remembered, he said. She cupped his face in her hands, traced his strong chin with her thumbs, and brushed her lips across his. She followed the bridges of scar tissue across his back with her fingertips. She said, You will be remembered. She told him the story of her own life. She asked him to remember her too.
My grandmother still hears the dying screams from that night. She remembers the dull, wet sound of machetes hacking through flesh and bone. The only thing that muted those horrors was a man she knew but did not know who wore bridges of scar across his back. I do not know the intimate details, but my mother was conceived.
In the morning, surrounded by the smell and silence of death, my grandparents crawled out of the river that had, overnight, become a watery coffin holding 25,000 bodies. The Massacre River had earned its name. The two of them, soaking wet, their bodies stiff and on the verge of fever, crawled into Ouanaminthe. They were home. They were far from home. My grandmother laced her fingers with my grandfathers and they sought refuge in an abandoned church. They fell to their knees and prayed and then their prayers became some- thing else, something like solace.
When night fell again, the Dominican soldiers crossed into Oua- naminthe, into a place where they did not belong. My grandfather was killed. He saved my grandmothers life by confronting three soldiers, creating a window through which my grandmother could escape. Jacques Bertrand died wanting to be remembered, so my grandmother stayed in that place of such sorrow, took a job cooking and cleaning for the headmaster of a primary school. At night, she slept in an empty classroom. She gave birth to my mother and later married the headmaster who raised my mother as his own. At night, my grandmother took my mother to the river and told her the story of how she came to be. My grandmother knelt on the riverbank, her bones sinking in the mud as she brought handfuls of water to her mouth. She drank the memories in that water.


When my mother turned twelve, she, my grandmother, and the headmaster moved to Port-au-Prince. The school  had  closed  and the headmaster took a new appointment in the capital. At first, my grandmother refused to leave her memories, but the headmaster put his foot down. She was his wife. She would follow. My mother recalls how her mother wailed, her voice pitched sharp and thin, cutting everything around her. In the front yard of their modest home, a large coconut tree fell, its wide trunk split neatly in half. The fallen fruit rotted instantly. My grandmother went to the Massacre River, her long white hair gathered around her face. She took river mud  into her hands, eating it, enduring the thick, bitter taste. When my mother and the headmaster found her, my grandmother was lying in a shallow place, shivering beneath a high moon, her face caked with dry mud.
In the capital, my grandmother was a different woman, quieted. The headmaster consulted Catholic missionaries, houngans and mambos in case she had been possessed by a lwa or spirit, and needed healing. Finally, he resigned himself to living with her ghosts. He loved her as best a man whose wife loves another man can. He fo- cused on my mothers education and waited. Sometimes, the head- master asked my mother if she was happy. She said, My mother does love you.
It wasnt until the day my mother left Port-au-Prince that my grandmother became herself again. Ive been told that the headmas- ter and my grandmother stood on the tarmac white with heat,  the air billowing around them in visible waves. My mother kissed her mother twice on each cheek. She kissed the headmaster. She turned and headed for the staircase to board the plane, a heavy wind blowing her skirt wildly. My grandmother didnt run after her only child but she did say, Ti Coeur. Little heart. My mother stopped. She didnt turn around.

My mother is a small, nervous woman. Her life began, she says, the day she got off the Pan Am flight from Port-au-Prince in New York City. She sat in the back of a yellow taxicab driven by a man who spoke a language she did not understand. She stared out the dirty window and up at the tall steel buildings. She was twenty-one. My


mother found an apartment in the Bronx. She took a job as a seam- stress for Perry Ellis making clothes she loved but could not afford. She learned to speak English by reading the dictionary and watch- ing American television. Once a month, she wrote her mother and the only father she knew a long letter telling them about America, begging them to join her. My grandmother always wrote back, but refused to leave Haiti. She would not leave the ghost of a man who could not be forgotten.
My mother went to doctor after doctor trying to find  someone who would free her from the sharp smell of blood that has always suffused her senses. Each doctor assured my mother it was all in her head. She took the subway to Chinatown and tried acupuncture. The acupuncturist carefully inserted needles into the webs of her thumbs, and along her bodys meridians. As he placed each needle, he shook his head. He said, There are some things no medicine can fix.
When I asked my mother how she met my father she said, I wasnt going to marry a Haitian man. She rarely answers the question she is asked. My father is an ear, nose, and throat specialist. He is the last doctor my mother consulted. When she told him she could only smell blood, he believed her. He tried to help her and when he couldnt,    he asked her to join him for dinner. Eventually he asked for her hand in marriage. She didnt say yes. She told my father she would never return to Haiti, that he would have to accept that her life began a year earlier. She was a seamstress whose senses were suffused with the smell of blood, who didnt know her father and couldnt under- stand her mother. They were married in a Manhattan synagogue, nine months after they met.
My parents remained childless for many years but never discussed the matter. If my mother was asked when she would start a family, she would say, I am very much in love with my husband. When she learned she was pregnant with me, at the age of forty, it was a hot July afternoon in New York, 1978. She ran out to the street, threw her hands in the air, stared into the incandescent sun. She cried as the light spread over her. A joyful sound vibrated from her throat, through her mouth and into the city around her. She went to my fa- thers office and told him the news. He cried too. When I was born,   I was crying lustily. We are a family unafraid of our tears.


My mother has never been able to accept that she will never know her real father. She worries that her mother has woven the story of her conception into an elaborate fable to hide a darker truth. My mother has an imagination. She knows too much about what angry, wild soldiers will do to frightened, fleeing young women. My mother looks in the mirror and cannot recognize herself. She only sees the face of a man she can never know. When I was a little girl and we   sat together at the dinner table, my mother often stared into the distance, grinding her teeth. My father would take her hand and say, Jacqueline, please stop worrying. She never did. She was the keeper of her mothers secrets. She was a secret herself.
Every summer, once I turned five, my parents took me to JFK and sent me to my grandmothers for three months. I was dispatched to do the work of dutiful daughter in my mothers absence. My grand- mother and the man I know as my grandfather, the headmaster who took in a scared young woman whose skin had burned ebony, whose hair had bleached white, who bore a child with no father, they were kind to me. I brought them pictures of my parents and money my mother carefully stuffed in my shoes. I brought cooking oil and pantyhose, a VCR and videotapes, gossip magazines, corn flakes. I knew never to bring anything sweet.
My grandmother kept her promise to Jacques Bertrand. Each time she saw me, she offered new fragments of their story or, if my mothers fears were correct, her story. I looked like him, had his eyes and his chin. Like my parents, my grandmother and the headmaster doted on me. When I returned to the States at the end of each August, I would try to ask my mother questions, to better piece things together but she would only shut herself in her room, rub perfume across her upper lip, lie on her back, her eyes covered with a cool washcloth.
When I was thirteen, the headmaster drove my grandmother and me to their beach property in Montrouis for the afternoon. Just before leaving New York for the summer, I had celebrated my bat mitzvah. The three of us sang along to konpa, and the adults listened to me chattering from the backseat. It was a good day. I longed for my mother to know there was so much joy to be found in the coun- try of her birth. As we pulled into a gas station, beggars suddenly


swarmed our car, a throbbing mass of dark, shiny faces and limbs needing more than we could possibly give. There was a man with one leg and one old, wooden crutch. His face was disfigured by a bulging tumor beneath his left eye. He planted his hands against the glass  of the window, leering at me, the skin over the tumor rippling with his anger. It was the first time I understood the land of my mothers birth as a place run through with pain.
Each time I returned to New York and the comforts of home, I brought pictures and long letters and special spicesthese affections, mother by proxy. My mother always took me for lunch, alone, at the Russian Tea Room the day following my return. She had me recount my trip in exhaustive detail, inhaling from a perfume-scented hand- kerchief every few minutes, carefully probing so as to get the clearest sense of how her mother was doing. Once in a while, I forgot myself and asked my mother why she didnt just go to Haiti to find out for herself. In those muments, she gave me a stern look. She said, It is not easy to be a good daughter.
When I turned sixteen, I went to summer camp in western Massa- chusetts because I was young and silly. I wanted to do normal things. Haiti was too much work. I was tired of the heat and the smells and the inescapable poverty, how my sweaty limbs caught in mosquito netting, how I had to go to the well for water when the cistern wasnt working. I was sick of the loud hum of generators and tiny lizards clinging to window screens and the way everyone stared at me and called me la mulatte. Summer camp was a largely disappointing ex- perience. I was a city girl and the Berkshires were far too rural for me. I wasnt any kind of Jewish the other girls at the camp could understand. I spent the summer sitting on the lakeshore reading, la- menting that I could have been at a real beach in the Caribbean with people who loved me and looked like me. It would be ten years before I returned to Haiti.
The next summer, my father took me to Tel Aviv. He showed me the apartment where he grew up in Ramat Aviv. He showed me his parents graves, told me how much they would have loved me. I saw all kinds of people who did indeed look like me, who didnt laugh at my stuttered Hebrew. We spent a week on a kibbutz, my father in his


linen shirt and shorts, tanned, laughing, home. I felt a real sadness for my mother, who couldnt take such joy in the land of her birth. We went to the beach. We went to Jaffa and looked toward the sea and Andromedas rock. We cried at the Wailing Wall. I understood that Haiti was not the only place in the world run through with pain.

The year after I graduated from law school, the headmaster died. I called my grandmother to ask how she was doing. She said, I have been a good wife. She was ready to return to Jacques Bertrand. I told my mother we had to go see her mother. She was lying on her bed, rubbing perfume across her upper lip. She had not taken news of the headmasters death well. He was the only father she ever knew. She turned to me and said, This is my home, where I am needed.    I said, You are needed elsewhere, and she waved a hand limply, conceding the point.
My father prescribed my mother some Valium, and the three of us flew to Port-au-Prince. By the time we landed, my mother was suf- ficiently sedated. As we disembarked and walked into the terminal, she dreamily asked Are we there? My grandmother and her driver were waiting for us. I inhaled sharply as I saw her for the first time in a decade. She was impossibly small, a frail figure, her dark flesh much looser now, her features hollowed, her white hair swept atop her head in a loose bun. She and my mother stood inches apart and stared at each other. My grandmother took her daughters face in her hands, nodded. That night, in our hotel, I heard my mother whisper to my father that she could hardly breathe but for the smell of blood.
After a few days in the capital helping my grandmother settle her affairs and visiting the headmasters grave, she was ready to return to Jacques Bertrand. Despite our demand she stay in the capital or return to the States with us, my grandmother was resolute. We drove across the country to Ouanaminthe on the only passable road. It took hours and by the time we arrived, we were all tired, sweaty, sore, and irritable. Ouanaminthe was not the city it had once been. It was a sad, hopeless place, crumbling buildings everywhere, paint peeling from billboards, the streets crowded with people, each person wanting and needing more than the next. Most of the roads had gone to mud from


recent flooding. The air was stifling and pressed down on us uncom- fortably. As we stood in the courtyard in front of the small concrete house my grandmother had purchased, men hanging from a passing Tap Tap leered at us. My father stood in front of me, glaring. My mother rubbed her forehead and asked my father for another Valium. My mother and her mother kept to themselves for the first few days, huddled together, trying to make up for nearly thirty years of separation. There was no room for my father and me in what they needed from one another. On the second  night, I  went  to  a local bar where everyone stared as I took a seat at the bar. I drank watery rums and Coke until my face and my boredom felt numb. I danced to Usher with a man named Innocent. When I snuck back into my grandmothers house, I found her sitting in the dark. She nodded to me but said nothing. On the third night, the moon was high and bright, casting its pale light over and through everything. I lay be- neath mosquito netting in a tank top and boxers, one arm over my head, one arm across my stomach, my body feeling open and loose. I listened to the sounds of everyone else sleeping. I tried to understand
the what and why of where we were.
Just as I was on the verge of drifting asleep, I heard a scratching at the door and sat up, pulling the sheets around me. My grandmother appeared in the doorway. She curled her bent fingers, beckoned. Slowly, I stretched myself out of bed, pulled on a pair of jeans and flip-flops.  I found my grandmother by the front door. My mother was standing next to her,  fidgeting, shifting from one foot to the other, clutching  at her perfume-scented handkerchief. Whats wrong? I asked. My grandmother smiled in the darkness. Come with us, she said.
We walked nearly a mile to the banks of the Massacre River, my grandmother pressing her hand against the small of my mothers back. In the distance, we could see soldiers keeping watch at the checkpoint, their cigarettes punctuating the darkness. I heard hun- dreds of frightened people who looked like me splashing  through the water, searching for safety and then, silence. My grandmother climbed down the damp, steep riverbank, my mother warning her mother to be careful. She waved for us to join her. I slipped out of  my sandals, took my mothers hand, helped her into the river. We


stood in a shallow place. I curled my toes in the silt of the riverbed and shivered. I had pictured the river as a wide, yawning and bloody beast, but where we stood, the river flowed weakly. The waters did not run deep. It was just a border between two geographies of grief.
My grandmother pointed down. The hem of her dressing gown floated around her. Here, she said softly.
My mothers shoulders shook but she made no sound. She gripped my arm. I cannot breathe, she said. Then she dropped to her knees, curled into herself. She said, I must know the truth.
I knelt behind her. I held her, tried to understand her. I said,  You can breathe. My grandmother said, You know the only truth that matters. Again I heard hundreds of frightened people splash- ing through the water, keening, reaching for something that could never be reached. The ground beneath us trembled from the heavy footsteps of roving soldiers. I smelled their sweat and their confused, aimless anger.
We knelt there for a long while. My grandmother stood, whis- pering the story of how she came to know and remember Jacques Bertrand until her words dried on her lips. I stroked my mothers hair gently, waited for her breathing to slow, her back rising into my chest with a melancholy cadence. We mourned until morning. The sun rose high. Bright beams of light spread over and through us. The sun burned so hot it dried the river itself, turned the water into light. We were left kneeling in a bed of sand and bones. I started crying. I could not stop. I cried to wash us all clean.

My mum is driving me to prison. Shes pretty drunk, but shed know the way coked out too, which shell be on the way back. Im ditching the last of my stash with her.
Dont fraternize, she says. Ma, cmon.
People talk. I know what happens in there.
Ill be fine, Ma. And I truly am a lot less jittery than last time, having invested last years profits into buying protection from the Aryan Brotherhood for the next six to nine years. Pass the Scotch. She swigs a mouthful and sends it over. I take a sip, pour a little on my hair, dribble a line down my back. Thirty years old from a craggy island in Scotland Ill never get to. This is the kind of shit I should do, I confess. Make something beautiful, that people have for their
last drink before prison.
Scotch is basically cocaine for rich people, my mum says, which makes it clear that she doesnt know cocaine that well, since cocaine is really crack for rich people. Id say Scotch is more like cocaine for people too chicken to risk mandatory sentencing guidelines, but then again here I am on the losing end of that one.
Jerry will be done with school when I get out, I realize.
I hope he makes it, she says, followed by her first swerve, dodg- ing an imaginary cyclist.


Why wouldnt he make it? I wonder, helping myself to more of the Scotch, dousing my nose, slurping from the bottle like Gatorade after a basketball game.
Its right around the age kids go bad in this town, she says, veer- ing to avoid an invisible chicken, a dog, then banking hard for the mail truck. Benjamin, she says. Daniel. Kerri. Caitlin.
Caitlin was a fuckup from the start, I point out.
That may be true, but fourteens when she got  violent,  mum says. And I remember when Caitlin came back from her first tae- kwon do class, all nunchucks and jump kicks, how she beat me purple on the front lawn and still it was the most fun Id had since Street Fighter broke at the arcade and you could play all day on a single quarter. I pass mum the Scotch and she gulps it, spraying it back at me in a tropical mist.
But Jerry? I wonder. I hear hes getting decent grades. Can make a jump shot here and there. A good head of hair on his shoul- ders. Wheres the trouble in that?
Crapohontas! my mum exclaims, then yanks the wheel toward the shoulder and up a small incline, braking hard at a scenic overlook of a dung-splattered cow field and an assortment of decomposing motor homes under a lemon-lime sun. She caps the Scotch and hurls it into the backseat, then slaps her face into serious, frown tips hang- ing limp like a perverts mustache. Look, Jason. When its your own, you dont see it coming. One day your daughters helping clean the toilet; two days later shes out-dancing you at the wet T-shirt contest. And I got five kids worth of statistical proof that the fourteenth birthday is always the day in the middle. Present company included. You too? I wonder, and I suppose I can see it, the old pictures of  Ma with electric orange bra straps and hair styled like elaborate topiary and puddles of purple and green makeup, PCP and stickups
radiating in her eerie yellow smile.
Me too, she admits, wiggling the steering wheel. You  too.  All of us. Makes you wonder if we were decent at sports or school, how thingsdve gone. Translucent froth drips from  her  nose,  leading me to wonder if her brain has gone to mush and is leaking out her orifices, finally, until I spot the coke clumps like unmixed sugar, her headstart on the stash.


Well, weve all been pretty good at the cop sprint, I point out. There is that, she agrees.
Caitlin had her tae kwon do blue belt. Daniel made the spelling bee once. Kerri could draw bird pictures like they flew right onto the page. And Benjamin, well, and it is a reach on Benjamin, two years younger than me and a life of canned chili and video games and In- ternet futzing and silence, he can stay up for two days straight if we have enough Red Bull on hand.
She stays quiet. The engine chortles and traffic screams and blue- grass pops and slides on  the radio.  Danielles looking after Jerry, I note, and Id appreciate it if you could check in on him now and then.
Danielles even loonier than Caitlin! she exclaims, and I recall why I divorced Danielle in the first place: how she drove motorcycles blindfolded and threw dinner plates at mailmen and left the oven on all night with the entire contents of the bathroom cabinet inside. I got two jobs and guardianship of three other grandkids and a suit- case worth of snow to sell, my mum continues, now give back the Scotch.
Yellow-tipped fingers foxtrot over the armrest, itchy and devas- tated like squished caterpillars. I dig out the Scotch from the back- seat, give it a shake like a Magic 8 Ball, except no answer surfaces and Im forced to take a long ruminative pull before I send it over. Lets go see him, I decide. Jerry.
I get the cowed look back, sorry and sad and too scared to say it. What time are you due? she asks.
Ill be fine, I tell her, and now its an order: Lets go.
She points the truck off the highway and we backtrack down local roads for twenty minutes, rolling through identical suburbs and past identical strip malls until she tucks in at one of the identical Star- buckses. His schools across the street, she says.
Good, I say. Heres money for coffee. I slip her a twenty and catch her wrist, squeeze her palm, as close to a hug as I get.
Be nice, she urges, and try to listen, but Im out the  door before I catch the brunt of her lecture.
The schools done up like an old Spanish mission, with a wide courtyard paved over and stocked with basketball courts, an audito-


rium doubling as a chapel, nifty white-arched classrooms offset by grungy temporary units arranged like boot camp barracks. It is hid- eously sunny, the worst kind of school day. I tip my baseball cap at a custodian hosing down a pile of mats on the sidewalk and look over at a ramshackle guard building carrying a hand-painted sign that says oFFice, a pride of bulky Hispanic women chitter-chattering and a platoon of dazed students ambling in mindless orbits like penguins on a hot day at the zoo.
I walk, fast, out, away, charged, striding beside a bashed fence laced with hot-dog wrappers and soda bottles, waiting, waiting, feel- ing time slip, time dripping like sweat, the hot stupid sun, pulling down my cap, creating more and more distance, feet on top of miles on top of months on top of years. Halfway around the block I hear scrapes and murmurs, a wave of radio static. I creep up on a green Dumpster in a secluded nook walled off by trees and a chain link gate, perfect for trying out cigarettes and adventurous girls so long as they can take the smell. Boys flip skateboards off a curb and swig energy drinks, their backpacks piled in a trash heap, rap music fuzz- ing from cell phones. Leaning on a guardrail a near-teen kid with Jerrys square chin and Danielles hazel eyes and my monstrosity of a hairdo scrawls into a notebook held two inches from his face.
I step out from behind a parked van and its like Im knocking  off liquor stores again, six sets of spooked eyes deciding whether to pretend to be a tough guy or not. Get out, I  tell them, and kick  the Dumpster hard twice for effect. They snatch their backpacks and shoot out for the street, but when I jab a f inger in Jerrys ster- num he coughs hard and stays put, neatly folding up his notebook and plumping his hair hedge and rubbing his hands on the back of his jeans. The spot stinks of fry grease and fungus, and Id bet all the cash buried in my  backyard that yesterdays lunch special was  f ish sticks.
Hey, man, I offer. Then, to be clear: Its me. Dad.
He coughs, then spits, then frowns, staring at the Dumpster, scratching his neck, his cheeks softening like water put to oatmeal. How you doing? I ask, and he stands perfectly still for at least a minute before I slap my hands together in front of his face.


Dont mean to be rude, but I dont have much time, I explain. Hes hunched over and blank as a bus seat, waiting for me to lose interest and leave, like usual. Say something, I order.
He grunts and shuffles and snorts before risking eye contact: Hiya, Pops.
Which makes for the first time I have ever been addressed that way seriously. Laughter pours out of me like the first beer of the night, but when he tries to turn my handshake into an eight-part gangster breakdance I clamp on to his shoulder instead.
Good to see you, I say, though I havent actually decided yet, the kids sprouted from bungling toddler to life-sized human being since the last time I tuned in, complete with a regulation-size basketball taking up the entirety of his backpack and four wisps of hair on his lip matted up to imitate a mustache. Whatcha writing?
He unfolds his notebook, shakes open a page. Lyrics, he admits. Nice. What kind of song? I dredge up the pictures Danielle posts online, mostly Jerry cowed around a birthday cake or leading a fast break, though its possible Ive seen him buried in the back row of a marching band or church choir, hoisting a beat-up guitar around a campfire, staring out a truck window singing along to Toby Keith.
Hip-hop, he says, with a salty sneer that says hes proud of it. Ha! I  exclaim,  though  its  less  a  laugh  than an alligator bite.
Well, lets hear it.
He glances straight at me, just enough waver in his eyelid to tell me hes scared. Its not that tight, he says.
I just want to hear it, I insist. I pop onto a knee and build up a grin, sequestering off the Scotch for a few seconds of good-natured get-up. Id appreciate it pretty bad.
He looks around for witnesses, flips through his notebook and back again. He hasnt gone bad yet, you can tell by the fluttery eyes, the watery-sick breathing, the sweat bubbles amassing on his fore- head. His duct-taped sneakers begin heel-tapping and words spill out of him, not a flow, not a river, not a babbling brook, nothing peaceful or natural but rather human-made and purposefully ugly, like a sewer or gutter runoff. He rolls through a list of profanity and sexual posi- tions and narcotics terminology laced with gibberish, made-up words


that dont come close to rhyming, like a harsh and sickly Eastern Eu- ropean language thats relegated to long-distance phone calls and bad memories. The number finishes with a massacre of thirty-five gangsta enemies topped off with a seven-woman orgy back on his yacht, the musical equivalent of running seashells through a lawnmower.
He looks up at me with a pink sheen over his eyes. Sour liquor pulls my scalp, the first pangs of a world-class still-drunk hangover. Thats good, I lie. Real good. Dang! I paste the smile back on, shake out a wink. His teeth form a wobbly sliver, and its the best chance Ill ever have.
Do you need any money? I ask. What?
But its not an offer Im inclined to extend twice. And as Jerry stands there wondering if he misunderstood, if I was serious, how muchor, worse, not wondering at all but instead waiting, for me to repeat myself, for somebody else to do somethingI am seized with a rare fatherly vision.
Running with the same bozos when he gets up to high school.
Landing his first bust doing somebody elses dirty work, selling a dime bag or fencing an iPod or riding shotgun on the wrong night.
Vacationing a few months in juvie before graduating to dropout- land, revolving through lockup and small-time gangs, stealing old clunkers, snorting battery acid, screwing insane women, and bad- rapping his way to a pile of nothing, until the second strike hits and hes tracking down his kid on his way to federal prison without a single thing to say.
Stick to the music, I tell him, youve got promise. I make a fist and tap it gently to his shoulder, then spin out to the street, hulking, enraged, dying of thirst. I will get the Scotch and drink it and then Ill call the police and turn Jerry in, Ill plant cocaine on  him, itll  be easy, hell go to juvie and the process will begin now, the crimes will come and the prison cycles will rotate and hell be done with it sooner, the stupid shaken out of him. Maybe hell uncover a mentor along the way, a basketball coach or English teacher who puts him to work sinking his free throws and learning to craft a bankable rhyme. Somebody who would rather be honest than awesome.


A cop car glides down the road and I flag it down with both hands. A bald patrolman hangs an elbow out the window, his sunglasses tight enough to leave ear rash.
Officer, I state. I think I may have observed some illegal activ- ity.
Dont pester the kids, he says. What?
We got a couple calls about you harassing boys by the Dumpster. They were skipping class, I point out. And it strikes me that I have never once in my life called the police, whereas at least two of
those kids called the police within the last fifteen minutes.
My third strike.
Thats not your concern, he says.
One of thems my son, I press, and Im going away. Take care of it at home.
My mum jogs down the sidewalk with one of those new Starbucks coffees the size of a bathtub, and its impossible not to grin at her old-lady jiggling. It is a fine final memory. Im not going home, you dumbass, I tell him. He gets out of the car and I could hug him as he puts me in the backseat, as he hears me out and calls in the request and nods and drives, heading back out on the highway, the rest of the way to prison.

At the bar the lights were low and green and everyones faces were close together and they were laughing and talking loud so they could hear each other over the music and some of them played pool and others sat at tables and leaned forward into one another and others played darts and everyone brought up beer bottles or glasses to their mouths and sipped them and the bartender took orders for drinks and the men and women who bought the drinks held them at the height of their stomachs and they laughed and when there were pauses in the conversations they would sip the drinks and look away or laugh and sometimes they all sipped their drinks together.
Maeve Fesnying sat with Vicki Sord who was a reporter at the Blue Ash News and they laughed and talked and Sord had thick blond hair that was curly and she was thin and wore bright red lipstick and tight purple pants and Maeve talked and laughed and drank her drink with Sord and their faces were close.
A few stools away a man with a beard and a round face and auburn hair mixed with gray and dark brown sat by himself with a mug of steaming tea in front of him and his shoulders were slumped over and down to the bar and there was an oval stain of blood on the right thigh of his khakis but no one could see this because his thighs were tucked beneath the bar and his head hung over the mug so the steam of the tea rose up into his face and he breathed the steam in and sighed it out.


Maeve laughed a loud laugh and the man with the tea and the beard looked up at her and his eyes rested on her for a mument and his eyes rested there for long enough to see that her hair was curly and her face was sharp there in the dark by  the bar and that she  was wearing a purple button-down shirt with large orange buttons and the man with the tea sat upright and his shoulders turned back and his lower lip tucked into  his teeth  and he stared at  Maeve  for a few seconds and Vicki Sord wiped her red-lipsticked mouth and excused herself to the ladies room and Maeve watched her walk off and turned to face the bar and sip her drink and she looked to her left and noticed the man with the tea and the beard staring at her and even in the low green light of the bar she could see his eyes were very blue and she saw the roundness in his cheeks and she sipped her drink again and leaned toward him and said into the noise and the music of the place,
Do you have a girlfriend?
The man with the tea blinked and wagged his head and looked around and away from her eyes and her eyes were smiling and he said,
Im sorry, I wasnt . . .  But do you?
Do I what? Have a girlfriend.
No. Im . . . No. I dont.
Maeve leaned in closer to him and blinked a slow blink and said, Well, I do. I have a girlfriend. Just to let you know.
The man shook his head and put his shoulders down again and said into his tea,
Im sorry.
What?
I said, Im sorry.
I didnt mean to make you feel sorry. Its just a line I use on guys that stare at me in bars.
The man took a deep breath and looked into his tea again and brought his face up to Maeve and said,
Sorry. I just couldnt help noticing your shirt.
Maeve looked down at herself and she moved closer to him and said,


You like it?
The man brought his hands up to the bar and they were shaking and he sipped his tea with his shaking hands and said,
I bet I know where you bought it. Really?
Yup.
She leaned in and he could smell her breath and she said, Five bucks says you cant.
The man put his elbows on the bar and put his face in his hands and rubbed his face and looked back at her and said,
Its not really new, is it? To me it is.
You bought it at a thrift store, right? Nope, she said and sipped her drink. Yes you did.
No I didnt.
Yes. You bought it at a thrift store in a town in Iowa. Ottumwa, Iowa.
When he said this Maeves eyes opened wide and her face went out to his face and she said,
Get the hell out of town! How did you know that? I was just in Ottumwa for work last week.
The Salvation Army, right? Next to the Target and the court- house.
Stop it! Yes, absolutely. Yes. How the hell did you know that? Do you really want to know?
Yeah. Yes. I do.
The man tucked his lower lip into his teeth again and said,
I just donated all my parents clothes to the Salvation Army in Ottumwa. Thats my mums shirt.
Whyd you donate their clothes? They died about a week ago.
Vicki Sord was out of the bathroom now and talking to a woman by the dartboard and didnt see Maeve drop her drink on the floor but she heard glass shatter and Vicki looked in the direction of the noise and she saw Maeve hug the man with the tea and hold him there at the bar while the steam from his tea steamed up from the mug.


Maeve hugged him and kept hugging him and he put an arm around her and her breath was on his ear and it was warm and she was warm and she pressed herself into him and he let his hand rest on her lower back and his nose pressed into the purple shirt and it smelled like home to him and he said,
Thanks.
Im so sorry. I cant believe it, she said. Its okay, thank you.
No, Im sorry. Im so, so sorry.
The man laughed and it was first time anyone had touched him in a long time and Maeve released him and looked at him and lunged into him again with a big hug and locked his arms to his sides so he couldnt move and she said,
I cant believe your parents died and Im wearing your dead mothers shirt. Im so sorry.
I appreciate it. Thanks.
She leaned back and looked down at herself again and started un- buttoning the orange buttons of the shirt and she wasnt wearing anything underneath it and the man put his hands out to stop her and said,
Oh, no, please, its fine. Keep it on . . . 
No. I cant believe Im wearing your mothers shirt and your mothers dead.
Listen, please, II dont even know your name yet.
Maeve stopped and took a breath and put a hand on her forehead and she wavered around and smiled and looked at this man and said,
Hah!
Vicki Sord walked over to the bar and sipped her drink and said, Whats going on over here?
Maeve turned around and blushed and said, Give this man five dollars.
What? Sord asked.
Give him five dollars. He deserves it. He won a bet. What bet?
Its nothing, he said. Nothing? Maeve asked.
The mans face fell back to his mug of tea and he put his hands


around it to warm them and his shoulders fell again toward the bar and he said,
Dont worry about it.
Maeve looked at Vicki and Vickis eyelids were drooping and she was smiling at everything and said,
Do you have your little pad, Vick? Yeah I do.
And a pen?
Yeah, yeah hold on.
Vicki reached inside her purse and handed Maeve a journalists notebook and then reached in again and picked out a pen and handed the pen to Maeve and Maeve took the notebook and the pen and pushed them to the man with the beard and the tea and said,
Write your name and where you live and Ill bring you the shirt back.
Its really not necessary.
No, no, no. Let me. Ill bring five bucks with it or something.
And the man looked at her and her hand was on her hip and her hip was out and he saw her Converse sneakers and the curve of her thigh where her hand rested and he said,
Okay.
Then he took the notebook and the pen and he wrote  his name and an address and a phone number and he slid the pad and pen back to Maeve and she ripped the paper out of the pad and folded it and put it in the pocket of her jeans and she stuck out her hand and said,
Good. Im Maeve, by the way. Im
No, wait!
She took the paper out of her pocket while holding his hand in mid-shake and read it aloud:
Nice to meet you, Rubber American Jon Sowse. Rubber Americans where I work, its not . . .  Jon, its a pleasure.
Well, its nice to meet you, Ma Maeve, like May with a v. Maeve, he said.


R ight, she said.
So Ill see you tomorrow or something? she asked. Okay.
Good.
Then Maeve turned back to Vicki and Vicki asked, Did you just get his number?
Yeah.
But youre gay, I thought.
No, no, no, no, no. You got it all wrong. Im not anything.
Then Vicki and Maeve laughed and the music was loud and Maeve drank her own drink and put the piece of paper back into her jeans and she looked back to Jon whose dead mothers shirt she was wear- ing but he was gone into the green light and the music.

Im in my pajamas looking out the window, peering through the blinds like a weirdo, watching my neighbor move out of his house. Hes stretched this out over the course of the last week, showing up at ten each night, backing his douchey Land Rover into his driveway, and going about the process of leaving his wife one cardboard box   at a time.
Im morbidly fascinated by this, which explains why Im rubber- necking through mini-blinds. Why doesnt he just get a U-Haul? He could get it over with in one fell swoop. And why does he show up    so late? Hes got a normal job, just like everyone else. Maybe he did a Google search and found that its less traumatizing for kids if theyre asleep when their dad loads his golf clubs and diplomas into the back of a $90,000 car.
His name is James. Not JimJames. Hes one of those guys who wears his cell phone on a plastic clip attached to his belt. Hes talking on it now as he Tetrises another box next to some other boxes. Ive found that there are two types of guys who clip cell phones to their belts: sweet nerds who fix your computer at work and white-collar criminals who guzzle Red Bull and swindle old ladies out of their Social Security checks.
I suspect that James is among the latter.
Sometimes Ellen, his wife, comes out and stands there in the drive-


way and watches him. She wears these brown clogs and her nighttime things and crosses her arms. She hardly ever says anything to him. In- stead she just sort of stands there glaring either at him or out vaguely at their browning front yard.
Hes smiling as he talks, standing in the driveway. His teeth are startlingly white. I can see them glowing from here. My guess is hes talking to herthe other woman. Shes a pharmaceutical sales rep, of course. My wife and all of the other wives refer to her, simply, as The Blonde.
Kristine comes into our bedroom. I dont really look at her be- cause Im pretty busy leering at James, but I get just enough to see her drop a magazine onto our bed. Do you think that asshole got  his teeth whitened? I ask. Does that really work? Maybe I should pick up some of those white strip things at CVS next 
I found this in Bradleys room today, she says, stopping me. What?
When I look over I see my wife standing at the side of our bed next to a Playboy magazine. My first reaction is to laugh, because this is funny, but I bite my lower lip instead, like Im being thoughtful. Ive learned this trick slowly over the last fifteen years. I bite a little harder when I notice Kristines shirt. Take Me Drunk, IM HoMe, it says across her chest in faded letters. Its mine. I bought it in stupid Dewey Beach years ago to be funny. Its too big on meway too bigand so its downright cartoonish on her.
I sit down on our bed and pick up the magazine. Its all wrinkled and dog-eared, and the girl on the cover  is  blond  and airbrushed to the point of looking like a slightly blurry computer animation. Breasts and lips and hips and a crop-top thing and a gleaming navel ring. We got rid of our movie channels last year, and so its been while since Ive seen a girl dressed like this.
Well, its . . . good to see him reading.
Kristine is prepped for this sort of reaction, and so without pause she says, I dont think its funny, Mitch.
Its kind of funny? I say. I add a question mark at the end in an attempt to lighten the mood with punctuation, but no luck. On the TV, the days baseball scores are running across the screen. I find


myself wondering about the TV in Jamess new apartment in the city. I imagine its the size of a foosball table, which is a thought I keep   to myself.
No, she says. Its pornography.
The word sounds weird. My wife has a slight speech impediment, like shes talking with a very thin sheet of paper at the back of her tongue. You can hardly notice it, but it f lares up on oddball words like cinnamon, chrysanthemum, and, apparently, pornography. She touches her mouth, hiding ita ref lex wired in since adolescence. Weelllll, I say, drawing the word out. And for  a  while thats all I say, as if this, alone, is a solid argument. Lets keep things in perspective here. Remember that freaky kid with the vampire teeth? The one on the newsfrom Towson? He shot up that TJ Maxx last month with the hunting rif le. They found cat skulls in
his room.
They were squirrel skulls, she says. And it was a K-Mart.
Im not sure how these details weaken my point, but somehow, strangely, they do, and so I just sit there for a mument, deflated. On the Playboys back cover, theres an ad for cologne. A good-looking actor I kind of recognize from a cop show is having a pillow fight with a pretty brunette girl in her underwear. I briefly consider grabbing one of our decorative throw pillows and smacking Kristine across the face with it. I wonder what would happen. Would she laugh and strip to her underwear and forget, if just for a mument, about our pervy son down the hall?
It seems doubtful. They should include a warning at the bottom   of the ad in legal type: *Outcome unlikely in most situations involving wives.
Outside, theres the gentle thud of a car door closing. I can still hear Jamess voice, blathering on into his cell phone. I cant make out any words, just happy mumbling through our well-sealed windows.
Im just saying . . . it could be worse, right? I say.
She shakes her head and sighs. Ive found that women sometimes pretend to be more infuriated with men than they actually are in order to make larger, more general points. But I can see by the look on her face that shes genuinely mystified How can this not make you mad? Are you really that . . . clueless?


Kris, have you heard of the Internet? Do you know what kind of stuff is on there? Compared to that, this magazine is really kind of charming. The fact that we havent caught him watching fetish videos on the computer represents probably our greatest achievement as par- ents. You didnt have brothers. You dont know boys like I do. Trust me . . . this is perfectly natural.
Shes prepped for this, too, and her eyes roll. I get the feeling shes been rehearsing this conversation with a stunt husband. Oh, right, right, she says. The its natural argument. Thats very in-fashion right now, huh? Youre all just animals. Its all evolutionary. Theres no way to control you or your overwhelming masculinity. We should all just get used to it, right?
This seems like something different than what I just said, and I briefly consider hiding out in the bathroom and pretending to brush my teeth. But then something dawns on me. Wait. How did you  find this thing anyway? You werent going through his stuff, were you? Hes not a little
No, I wasnt going through his stuff. It was sitting in his under- wear drawer, Mitchell.
His underwear drawer?
Yes. Im his mother. I was putting away his laundry.
To articulate her point, she moves to the basket of unfolded clothes thats been sitting on her reading chair for three days and starts an- grily balling socks into haphazard pairs. This seems like a little bit of a stretch, barefoot and folding laundry. Shes a corporate lawyer who makes twice what I do. And so as she continues taking her frustration out on our clothing, I think about the Catholic-guilt-ridden Play- boys of my own youth. When I was Bradleys age, I hid five of them elaborately with Cold War paranoia in the false bottom of a giant cardboard box of baseball cards. My goaland Id actually thought this throughwas to hide them so obsessive-compulsively that if I were to die in some freakish, crazy accident, no one, particularly my goddamn mother, would ever find them. My knuckleheaded son has been a hell of a lot less careful, and now were both paying for it. It doesnt seem fair.
What if it was Ella then? she says. What if you found a maga- zine with naked guys in her room?


I shudder at this. I know thats usually just an expression, but I actually do.
You think men are the only ones who think about sex, Mitch? Like its all just Dancing with the Stars and Lifetime movies for us? Come on . . . we just know how to actually control ourselves. Its a novel concept.
But Ellas not a woman, Kris. Shes nine. Thanks for the imagery, though . . . its every fathers dream.
And here we are, in this place weve been before. Right now were pretending that were actually talking about what were talking about. Were pretending that this conversation about our children and a creased, six-year-old girlie magazine isnt happening a hundred some-odd feet away from the exact spot in which Kristines friend is being replaced by someone younger.
She sighs at the laundry and bites a cuticle. Theres a 50/50 chance this conversation is over. Some stop suddenly. Others drift on aim- lessly for weeks, like British costume dramas. So I flip through the magazine. There are more ads for cologne, and some for sports cars and body spray, and then it falls open to the centerfold, Miss No- vember. Shes prettier than the girl on the coverseemingly less computer-generated. Shes lying on a beach chair, smiling, kind of shyor at least pretending to be kind of shy. A tiny green bikini top lies cast aside in the sand, and shes making a halfhearted go at cover- ing her breasts with her hands. Im not sure how this lovely girl and her mostly naked body are supposed to make me feel, but sitting here in my pajamas, I feel suddenly a little sad, and I think about Dewey Beach again, back before we got way too old to go there anymore. Lazing next to Kristine on towels because we were too broke and disorganized to get beach chairs. Dizzy and stupid from daytime drinking in the sun. The wind blowing her hair all over the place. Picking grains of sand from her navel while she laughs and swats me away. Her skin bitter from saltwater and sand and sunscreen.
Mitch, she says. Shes given up on the laundry bit, and shes standing in the middle of our room tugging at her lower lip in my giant T-shirt. I want you to talk to him.
And what am I supposed to  tell him?


Her irritation with me is palpable, like smoke in the room. Tell him his mother doesnt want that thing in the house, she says. Think you can manage that?

For no legitimate reason, I peek in on Ella first. Shes right where shes supposed to be, sprawled out sleeping in her bed at weird angles like a gunshot victim. If shes currently hiding horrible penis maga- zines in her underwear drawer, I hope I never find out.
Kristine has gone downstairs to make an unnecessary amount of noise. Shes knocking plates around and opening and closing cup- boards and cabinets. The cats probably ditched the scene by now  and curled up behind the dryer. Its his go-to spot at the first sign of unpleasantness. Maybe later, Ill join him.
From the window in the hallway, I can see the front of Jamess car next door. I wonder what his plan was. What did he take first? What has he left until the end?
Standing outside Bradleys bedroom door now, I clear my throat and fake a few coughs to give him some fair warning so he can cease and desist whatever unholy thing hes doing in there. When I knock, he answers fastYeah? he says. I put the Playboy behind my back, which seems unnecessarily cruel, but its too late now. His room smells like a teenage boy and the dcor hes chosen is what a local Foot Locker might look like if it got hit by a grenade. I step over a pair of red and black Adidas basketball shoes and a largely ignored backpack filled with schoolbooks.
Whats up, Dad? he says.
Hey,  I say, and then I pull the magazine out like its some sort of prize and every muscle in my sons body tenses at once. Streaks of heat darken his face, and I wish Id chosen a method that wasnt so much like an ambush. We need to talk about this, buddy.
Oh, dude, he says, but thats as far as he gets. He pulls a lone earbud from his ear and hangs his head, defeated. I expected more, if Im being honestan escape attempt or, at the very least, a passion- ate denial. His little flat screen is on in mute. Hes watching the same thing I was.
Its all right, Brad. Im not mad. I just . . . 


He waits for me  to  finish this sentence,  which makes two of  us. I should have had Kristine write me a script. At least some talking points.
Whered you even get it, anyway?
I can read his mind right now and I watch as he considers the rami- fications of being a snitch, like hes a low-level mafia goon. The fact that I dont seem to be madding is throwing him off. Hes trying to figure out my angle. Uhhh, he says.
Brad, Im not gonna waterboard you. Just tell me where you go it. Luke Hackman, he says, giving up. This guy from school. I
traded him an A-Rod rookie card for it.
Wow, Luke Hackman got screwed in that deal, I say, and then    I surprise us both by laughing. Bradley just watches, a little dopey- looking, as I sit down at the side of his bed and flip through the magazine again. Apparently its impossible for even a reasonably in- telligent grown man to hold a Playboy without looking at it. Miss November, whose name is actually Amber, has filled out one of those idiotic questionnaires. I scan her answers and wonder what infuri- ated my Rhodes Scholar wife more, the fact that this twenty-year-old girl has allowed herself to be so shamelessly objectified or that shes dotted the Is and Ts in her answers with an apparently random com- bination of bubbly hearts and smiley faces.
Bradley sees me reading. Her favorite movie is The Notebook, he says.
I read on and, of course, hes right. She likes horses, too, I say. Thatll come in handy if she ever fulfills her dream of becoming a . . . wow . . . large-animal surgeon? Is that even a real thing?
Arizona States got a really good Pre-Vet program, Dad, he says. Its, like, ranked and everything.
Im surprised suddenly then by a drive-by hit of love for my son.  It leaves me a little dizzy atop his wrinkly New York Yankees sheets. These debilitating waves of affection are more commonly directed at Ella, who wears butterfly clips in her hair and tells me that Im the best ten times a day. But I love this skinny punk, too, and his crack- ing voice and his impossibly big Adams apple. Hes the same boy I was a hundred years ago. The same boy we all were. He studies Miss


Novembers loopy words at night over and over after the rest of us have gone to bed, memorizing them along with the thrilling details of her body and wonders if a girl like thisif any girl at all, really will ever let him see her naked.
Okay, I say. I  wish Dr.  Amber here  all the best.  But we need to talk about your mum. Shes not exactly thrilled about this, Brad. What? mum? Oh. Oh God. Does she . . . like . . . think Im a perv? Well, maybe a little. Heres the thing you gotta understand.
Theyre not like us. To your mumto womenthis isnt just a mag- azine. Its more like a . . . a worldview. She thinks that this is how you see women. As . . . sex objects? Another question mark creeps in, but this ones less choreographed. Im not articulating myself very well. Does that make sense, Brad?
Um, he says. I guess so. Kinda.
That means no. I can tell by the completely blank look on his face, and now I have an overwhelming urge to slap the back of his head. A mument ago I loved him, and now Im contemplating low-level child abuse. That, basically, is fatherhood.
Okay, let me simplify it for you, then. Playboys are going to piss your mum off. So next time maybe think about a better hiding place. Your underwear drawer, Brad? Are you kidding me? Did you think about just cutting out the middle man and duct-taping it to her steer- ing wheel?
Huh?
Brad, youre busted. Give up the stunned look. She found this thing in your underwear drawer. She told me herself.
What? Nu-uh. It wasnt in my underwear drawer. Seriously, Im not stupid, Dad. I had it over there, with Grandpas Sports Illustrateds.
What are you talking about?
He hops out of bed, all ropy in baggy gym shorts, and kneels down to the bottom shelf of his bookcase where he keeps my dads old Sports Illustrateds in three leaning piles. See, I had it here. Middle pile, fifth one from the top. He counts out five magazines and lifts, revealing a boozy looking baseball player from the 70s instead of a Playboy. She must have, like, found it or something.
Jesus, I say.


What?
Bradley doesnt see what I see. His mother didnt stumble ran- domly on this thing while perusing antique Sports Illusrateds. She was looking for itor for something like it, at least. She probably started with me, riffling through the harmless crap in my desk and nightstand, and then moved on to Bradley, a not-so-innocent by- stander. I look down at  Miss November  again. Shes  looking back  at me all pouty and oblivious, and I know exactly what my wife was thinking. If this is what men like James wantif this is what theyre willing to leave their wives standing in their driveways forthen maybe its what we all want.
Dad? says Bradley. Are you still, like, not mad at me?
Go back to bed, Brad, I say. Tomorrow youre apologizing to your mother.
But
But nothing.
I mean, what do I say? Youll think of something.

I drop the stupid magazine into the recycling bin in the kitchen, but I rethink that and move it to the garbage. As the metal lid closes with a satisfying bang, it feels definitive.
Shes standing in the kitchen, looking out over our dark yard and onto the street. Theres a bag of Oreos open on the counter, double- stuffed. For a while, I look at her from behind. One bare foot hooks gently around its opposing calf. In silhouette, shes like one of those long birds at the zoo, resting on one leg and pretending no ones looking at her.
Just then, the street over her shoulder and out the window lights up and Jamess Land Rover passes with a hum of European accelera- tion, and then its gone. I wonder how many other households this dickhead has disrupted this week. Maybe if he comes by tomorrow night Ill slash his tires. That seems reasonable enough.
Well, Brad feels like a complete pervert now, I say, popping an Oreo into my mouth. You can look forward to an incredibly awk- ward apology tomorrow.


She bites a cookie and keeps staring, holding its remainder in her fingers like a cigarette.
If it makes you feel better, I say, I think he actually did read  the articles.
Whered he get it? she asks.
The city last week.  He  and his friends found  it  sticking out  of  a Dumpster. Some little creep named Luke Hackman dared him to take it.
Im not entirely sure why Ive told her this. I guess Im protecting Brad. Or maybe Im just covering for all of us. Its probably better      if they think our behavior is less calculating and more a recurring symptom of our own hopeless stupidity.
The cat slinks by silently, assessing the situation in his snobby cat way. The unpleasantness in the house has passed. Just a small, do- mestic storm.
Do you ever feel old, Mitch?
I do, all of the timeright now, in factbut I dont  answer her.  Its dark in the kitchen. Just a row of low lights illuminate the wine- glasses in the cabinet. The green light over the oven has been blinking 7:22 for as long as I can remember. I put my hands on her hips and turn her around and kiss her on the mouth. Nothing serious. Noth- ing cinematic. Just a small, Oreo-flavored kiss, our tongues touching only for an instant. When we were young, I spent large sums of energy concentrating on the strawberry-like surface of Kristines tongue. I thought if I put my mind to it, if I really thought about it, I could identify the slight imperfection that caused the occasional word to gently slur like it did. I loved it about her, and now its just another thing that I dont even really think about anymore.
You cant kiss me, she says. Im eating Oreos. Her  fingers move to her lips again, but I dont want her to hide from me so I take her hands and pull them down to her sides. There are things I want to tell herthat I should tell her. Im not sleeping with a pharmaceu- tical sales rep, and Im not planning to. Theres no secret in my desk or my nightstand, just a bunch of ATM receipts and golf tees. I think belly button rings are kind of trashy-looking. I didnt impregnate our foreign housekeeper and keep it a secret, even after becoming gover-


nor of California. I didnt get a blow job from an intern. I didnt have Twitter affairs and send teenaged girls in Delaware grainy pictures of my junk. Our son is a good boy. Hes not a misogynist or a future date-rapist. Hes just a kid. I love her, and Im not as bad as shes gradually beginning to fear that I might be. Not even close.
Shes waiting for me to say all of these things. But I dont know  where to begin. And so I say the first actual words that materialize.
Only a complete asshole would spend ninety thousand dollars on a car during a global recession.


The Mexican girl at the west Texas rest stop faced New Mexico as if New Mexico was all of tomorrows problems  stretching before  her  in rust and fire. She was en route to nowhere, standing by the vend- ing machines, her beat-to-hell Tercel parked where the state troop- ers would not see her expired plates. My Peterbuilt rig idled in the painted light. We were on the westbound side of I40, close to the ghost town of Glenrio. Texas was where the nights long-haulers would roll in from. She was short and round-cheeked, hair tied up in a bouquet of auburn corkscrews, eye shadow lavender. In her line of work, it was early. In mine, the middle of a long day.
Her youth was bent from a scarcity of comfort. Or maybe thats what I projected. I had this bad habit of seeing the girls working the truck stops as victims, especially the young ones.  But  I  knew that  if you let your guard down, youd be left pondering how it all went wrong so fast. She tracked me the whole time without meeting my eyes. She had watched me step down from my cab and walk up with the MiSSing flyer in my hand.
Mira, por favor. I held up Sarahs picture. Conoces? Mira aqui. No, she said with a scant glance.
I stapled the paper four cornered to the inside of the lean-to shel- tering the vending machines.
Maybe you rest? She lifted her eyes the direction of my rig.


No rest, I said.
I walked back to the rig and looked up the grade to where the girl was little more than another signpost along the road. I refrained from lecturing them, but I thought a few good thoughts for her, for at least enough mercy to keep her leg from turning up in a coyotes mouth one morning. I couldnt  remember  if her  toenails were painted, or if she had any visible tattoos. Those things were important, as they would connect her to this world again if my well-wishing didnt hold. I was out of flyers. Five hundred down, another five hundred to be printed. In my cab I emailed a new master copy to an Office Depot in Albuquerque, where a stranger would prepare Sarah again for me.
She was always ahead of me and behind me and yet nowhere.
From this rest stop and a hundred others, two pairs of Sarahs eyes, fourteen and eighteen, gazed unblinking onto the rivers of interstate traffic and the insides of doorless bathrooms.
She rode along with the sympathetic long-haulers and territorial state cops, lay taped down to convenience store counters  between the herbal methamphetamines and headache powders. She crumpled under the backseats of family SUVs, tucked politely away on others vacations, then promptly forgotten, mashed with the clay, candy, and dog-shit shoe soles of other peoples children.
The ink and toner of Sarah as she was and Sarah as she might be ran in the sleet, baked in the sun, and withered in the rain. When the staples holding her fast gave up, she stared into the empty sky from littered ditches, among the cellophane discards and chucked lug nuts. I replicated and distributed, shared and asked, scanned her and posted her, and as always, in the end, it was the same. I left her behind.
One of the lucky breaks amid the compound fractures of my di- vorce from Miranda was the fact that we sold the house at the height of the real estate boom. We were gifted in our quitting. We sold, divided, and quickly relinquished the painful sight of one another. In less than a year, everything else collapsed. I went through truck- ing school just as the safest real estate you could own was portable. My rig was the only six-figure loan I carried. I went  from a  priest in the church of home and hearth to a full-time nomad on eighteen


wheels in under a year. If Sarah swam out willingly, or against her will on the back of one of these big alligators, I would swim with them, too.
I made the Office Depot in Albuquerque a half hour before close. I locked the rig with its engine idling and trotted across the soft black- top to work the stiffness out of my legs. I was forty-two and begin- ning to feel it. It was easier to freeze up as I got older. I tried to keep off the weight Id lost. I ate a lot of canned tuna and did pushups in parking lots and playgrounds.
A few kids slouched on ruined Hondas.  I  counted  three  guys  and two girls. I never stopped looking at boys of that age without imagining what Id have thought if Sarah had brought them home. Maybe I stuck on it because I last saw her on the cusp of full-blown high school adolescence and never had to get acclimated to the boys coming to the house, never had to divine their true natures beneath junior varsity jackets and drugstore, body spray deodorants.
It was much the same way when I went to truck-driving school. Scrawny redneck kids without the granddaddy that owned a fern- ery, poorer than the migrant workers because they didnt even have family, buying a case of Budweiser and shoplifting a jar of peanut butter every week to stay alive. I  knew those kids personally after  so many weeks in the driving classes, and I still couldnt keep from looking at their axle grease nails and thinking If Sarah had brought one home, I would have choked him at the door.
I smelled sage and lavender on the desert wind before disappearing into the shrink-wrapped air of the Office Depot. The clerk behind the print counter wouldnt even have been a contender. He was a smeary white stoner with dyed blond hair and tribal tattoos, the sort who went vegan in the desert and filled up on drum circle, his vacant head drifting with tumbleweed stories of an older cousin who went to Burning Man.
Picking up. Names Robbie.
He scanned the shelves below the counter.
Flyers? he asked. His eyes flicked over my face. Having done this in a dozen copy centers across as many states, I developed a story to cover for the fact that the girl on the flyer was my stepdaughter.


Part of the program, I said. Truckers for the Lost? Ever heard of it?
Nah, he said. He scanned a bar code taped down to the counter and entered in the number of flyers.
Its a good organization. They send the flyer, I post it along the way. Back and forth, I waved my hand in the air. His eyes tried to track it. He was anxious to close, high already.
Mind if I post one near the door? That okay with your manager? I am the night manager. Go wild.
I peeled a fresh color copy of my Sarahs from the cardboard box and rubber-banded the box closed again. The kid looked at her and made a show of scratching the black soul patch under his lip, a kind of burners bad acting for careful consideration.
You ever find one like her? he asked. What do you mean, one  like her? A runaway.
I never said she was a runaway.
Maybe he put it together, maybe not. I didnt think Sarah looked at all like me.
Well, yeah, I guess she coulda been kidnapped. But she looks like a runner.
What makes you say that? I looked at the young version of her for something Id missed over years, but it was the same photo, a yearbook shot with the false blue sky-and-cloud background.
Takes one to know one, maybe? I was a runner. Shes almost jumping out of that picture. Like she was thinking about it when they took it.
Outside, the night was not  any cooler,  but  had  come  alive with  a wind. I held the box of flyers under my arm. One of the boys Id counted on my way in was looking at my rig. He had his back turned to me. They looked like high school dropouts. I scanned their hands for spray paint cans, in case they planned on tagging my trailer. The two girls and two remaining boys idled near their cars, a few bottles poorly hidden in white McDonalds bags by the tires.
Evening, I said outside of the kids striking distance. It was a well-lit lot. Not empty, but you could never tell.


I expected him to return to his friends, but he stood unperturbed by my presence, hanging around as though hed been  waiting for  the guided tour to start. I unlocked the cab and stepped  up.  The  kid craned his neck to see inside. He was wearing a no-known-color hoodie, hands stuffed in the kangaroo pocket. His jeans slouched  far below his waist. His mouth was open enough for me to see the drunken clutch of teeth forming his overbite.
You can sleep in there, right? he asked. Yep.
I knew it, he said, like hed nailed a game show question. Hella tight.
Mind taking a look at something for me? I asked him. I wanted to see his hands.
You one of those Jesus freaks? Highway holy roller?
I unbanded the box, pulled out a flyer at arms  length, and put  the box on the stairs of the cab. He looked back to the car where his friends watched with the girls. He leaned forward to look at Sarah.
Here, take it. He took it and bit the quick of one thumbnail. Hey, Tanya! he shouted over to the cars.
What? Come here!
A.J., leave that guy alone. Get your skank ass over here.
Best watch how you talk to me, she shot back. Im not your bitch.
She sulked over with her bagged bottle. She was the youngest in the group, on fire to burn the brightest, the one with the most fear of being left out. She was short, a little splay-footed and skinny-hipped, built like a Little League t-ball player with tits. Out-flourished orange- blond hair in a midlength Japanese helmet, two different drugstore hues. Shed taken on the boys mouth to cover up the fact she was  about fifteen and wearing tough around like it was the one nice pair of jeans she owned.
You seen this girl? he asked her. She drank from the bottle openly.
No.


One of the boys, his black hair parted in the center and smoothed to his knobby head, loped over to where we stood. They were all by the rig now, including the third boy, a stumpy, muscled, pimply kid who looked like he had a religious devotion to steroids and Big Macs. The girl with him looked Navajo. She had an unlit cigarette between her fingers. She stood behind him and picked at the filter with her nail. The muscle kid stepped up, and by the way he parted them, I could tell he was their alpha dog. He had a moon face, a shiny black ponytail, and a dust-brush mustache as fine as babys hair. His biceps must have seventeen inches around.
All you truckers like crystal, yeah?
The kids seemed to draw together then, an unspoken change in the flock, a less significant me standing before a unified them. The first one, A.J., turned his back to me and put his hand on the muscle- heads shoulder. This dude aint no tweaker, Ali.
They all tweakers. Wheels aint turning, he aint earning. He folded his hands in front of his waist. What do you say, Dad?
No one ever called me Dad. Not even Sarah. You ought to be more careful, I said. Whys that? You a cop?
Im not a cop.
Dont matter. I didnt make you no offer. Just asking if you got a
substance abuse problem.
Youre a drug counselor, then.
Thats right. You gonna hate on that, I show you how I handle my business. He lifted the edge of his shirt, revealing an inch of pistol stock and gothic lettering above his elastic waistband. The Navajo girl moved in closer to the Ali kid and draped her arms around his shoulders. She was a little taller than he was, no longer a young girl but not the ground-out woman she would become. Her beauty was cutting her to pieces and she couldnt feel a thing.
How much? I asked.
How far you wanna go? Forty get you through tonight. Sixty,  you have a little extra just in case.
I took out my wallet. Ali slit his eyes at A.J. and fired a shaming laugh. What I tell you. You gotta listen to me, homes. They all tweakers. Go get his shit.


Skip the shit. I picked up a stack of flyers from the box and held the two twenties on top of the stack with my thumb. Take the forty, keep your shit, and hand these flyers out.
Ali took the stack of flyers and stuffed the twenties into his front pocket. He frowned.
Give them to  your  customers, the guy whos  cooking the shit  for you, anyone who might know where girls go when they cant be found.
He showed Sarahs face to the Navajo girl on his shoulder. She looked at Sarahs face, then to me, and unwrapped herself from Ali. Ali considered Sarah, then threw the stack of flyers straight up into the air.
Fuck your flyers.
They fluttered and caught in the breeze of the diesel.  He  rested his hand on the gun stock under his shirt and slinked off a few steps before turning back to the cars. The Navajo girl stuck the unlit ciga- rette into her mouth and followed him.
Lets ride, Ali shouted at A.J. and the mouthy girl. A.J.s jaw tensed as his only apology. He followed, but the mouthy one didnt.   I picked up the flyers that hadnt escaped yet. I could hear the girl take another drink. She dropped the bottle in the bag on the asphalt and it rolled away. I pulled a flyer from under her dirty white Keds.
Tanya! A.J. shouted from the open door of his Civic. Now!
I looked up at Tanya, her face smoldering where the booze had doused her fire. A.J.s patience expired. He slammed the door and started the engine. Bass and a razzing electronic music Dopplered past as he sped out of the lot, chassis sparking on the asphalt.
Tanya watched him go, unperturbed by abandonment. The truck rattled its sweet rattle and a downdraft brought the warm exhaust across my neck.
You think you know what youre doing, hanging  around  guys like that.
You dont know me.
No. But I recognize you. You think youre invincible. She scoffed. No I dont.
You want to end up on one of these flyers? Depends. She was so full of herself.


It depends?
Depends on what got her on the flyer.
Its a MiSSing flyer, I shook it at her. What do you think got her on the flyer? She disappeared. No one can find her.
She took the smeared flyer from my hand and looked at Sarahs face. Alls Im saying is, how do you know where she is now aint better
than where shes from?
The lights in Office Depot darkened.
Is that really what you think when you see a girls face on a MiSS- ing flyer? Its a sign of her good luck?
Maybe she got something better and kept it to herself.
I could see the shadow of the Office Depot stoner behind the big windows. He pushed the automatic doors open with his bony arms, stepped outside, then closed them and locked up.
You dont think that hanging out with drug dealer assholes and talking to strangers in parking lots at night is a more likely reason to end up on a flyer?
She returned a look of impenetrable indifference.
Sweetie, if its such a good idea, why dont you climb up in that cab and hit the road with me?
She looked at the twilight interior of the cab and smirked. You dont seem like youre going somewhere better.
I stepped closer to her, into the radius of her candy perfume and Kool-Aid booze. She stood her ground, may have even leaned in a little. I lowered my words on her head.
You know who the biggest serial killers in this country are? Long- haul truckers.
She raised Sarahs flyer between us and pulled it tight against her face like a mask, her features distorting the twin photos. She twitched her head left and right with each mocking word.
Youre. So. Scary.
I surprised her when I ripped the paper from her hands. But she was fast, and she decked me with a closed fist before I could step back. She threw a right cross like she learned from older brothers. The blow caught me across the cheekbone, glancing over the bridge of my nose. My eyes stung. I caught myself before slapping her back,


which was a good thing for a lot of reasons, the first of which was the night manager, jogging toward us across the empty lot.
Hey! he shouted.
You like that, you fucking psycho? she spit. Go home! I shouted at her. Go!
She reached down and picked up her bottle from the ground. I backed away and she pitched it into the side of the rig, where it shat- tered in the bag and rained on the ground. I scooped the box of flyers into the cab. They sloshed onto the floor.
Think I cant protect myself? Fuck you!
I slammed the door to the cab, but I  could  hear  her  outside. You go home! Run! You aint never going to find that girl! Thats
a curse on you, motherfucker! Never in your fuckin life!
I ground the gears bad, my eyes watering, my  heart unused to  the adrenaline. I heard something solid hit the side mirror of the rig and the glass fell out in a funhouse spider web. I gripped the suicide knob and hammered the gas, the cab bucking over its air shocks. The rig heaved away in a large arc, tilting from the girl still screaming profanities and the jabberwocky night manager by her side. The big diesel roared. I felt the load shift and the trailer start to get light on me. Horns lit up. I bounced across  two lanes, let  off, and tucked it in just before pulling head-on into oncoming traffic. Four hundred copies of Sarah sloshed around me.
At 4 a.M., I parked in a rest area near Barstow. Getting socked in the face by a teenage girl was about as good as crystal for keeping you up all night. I replayed the image of her with Sarahs flyer pulled to her face. There was no sleep in the air, just the absence of any image in the busted side mirror, which was doubly disorienting when you expected to see your own exhausted face.
I watched a lot lizard climb out of a sleeper cab down the line of rigs, a midriff jean jacket flung fast over her shoulders. Her red hair was perm-fried and cab-tussled. She scanned the lot self-consciously, looking for the twilight cockpit of a state trooper, gentlest of her nat- ural predators. The rig she climbed out of kicked on the low beams and lurched into gear. The guy got his rocks off and had to start turning those wheels.


I blipped through the dead channels on the CB radio until I heard a guy singing a spiritual in a strong, low voice. The last note carried and died. There was a long emptiness, and then someone squawked back Amen, brother, and then it was silent again and stayed that way. Nobody looking for conversation in the holy pre- dawn hour.
It was about this time of night Sarah disappeared. No more talk- ing. Thats what the abandoned phone had meant. She was like a satellite that had just broken orbit, mumentum carrying her deeper into the void with each passing minute.
Six years on and I often woke at this hour, unable to sleep. The stars would be over soon. Idleness was no good when you were solv- ing for peace in the long division of estrangement. I squared up Sar- ahs flyers and peeled one off the top of the stack. With my staple gun hooked in my belt loop, I stepped down from the cab.
In the mens room, the tireless war between vandals and the manu- facturers of automatic hand dryers continued. On the womens side of the building, I could hear the hooker gargling, brushing her teeth. Time passed in the click and running intervals of the water conserva- tion faucets. My cheek was swollen. I had a scrape on my nose where the girls ragged, bitten fingernail grazed me.
On the narrow grass island by the bathrooms was a hutch protect- ing a faded map behind a scratched up Plexiglas panel. On the map, the roads and landmarks were redacted by hieroglyphics of paint pen. It was the legend for the underworld beneath the truckers atlas. I found a clear spot on the side of the hutch, facing east. The sky was lighter by degrees, dawn coming. I stapled Sarahs flyer looking at the miles Id covered. The sun would fade her fast, but it would be a good view while it lasted.
The hooker bought a Coke and a pack of peanut butter crackers from the vending machines. She perched on top of a picnic table with a passing glance my way. I flattened out a  rumpled dollar bill and fed it to the machine. The machine rejected it. I fed it again; again rejected. I worked the bill on the side of the machine in two hands, ironing out the wrinkles, but the bill ended up wet from the dew. The machine scorned it a third time.


The hooker walked over and reached around me to feed four quar- ters into the change slot. She pulled the tongue of my damp dollar from the machine and pocketed it. She returned to her breakfast.
Thanks, I called after her.
She raised her hand in my direction. A gesture between youre wel- come and be quiet.


It began as a joke. But soon I found myself in our dirt-pit of a back- yard, gazing at the empty horizon over the flat grassy fields that dom- inated our lands, and imagined what the mountain would look like. Not a large mountain, I told Gwen, but definitely big enough that it would never be considered a hill. A hill is something Sammy builds from snow. I told Gwen what the sun would look like coming up and over the peak of our first mountain. She pointed at the horizon, and with an extended finger, drew a triangle on the sky.
The elders were the most difficult to convince. At our town hall meeting they took turns standing, hollering, and shredding a textbook featuring other countries most beautiful mountains. Several were con- cerned, after eighty or so years of flat living, that their legs wouldnt move in a motion for mountain walking. Standing at the front of the room, I told everyone to practice, and marched in place while smiling. They took turns, slowly moving their thighs upward until horizontal, and complained in a chorus of phlegm-coughs and boo.
Wait, said one elderly man who I knew as Johnson. What would the air be like up there, on a mountain?
I explained how for hundreds of years the air quality of flat living had polluted us. That from my research, using a type of weather bal- loon, an invisible smog had formed a sphere one hundred yards sky- ward. The benefits of building a mountain would be tremendous.


Think of future generations, the children, I said. Concentrate on a future where you look out your window and see a mountain.
The children, of course, were the easiest to convince. I told Sammy about sledding, skiing, downhill cycling, and hiking. I showed her my sketch of a playground in the sky, near the peak of the proposed mountain. Afterward, I watched her from the front window of our home lifting her bicycle over her head in the middle of the street, her arms trembling to balance it at a severe downward angle.
The town meetings continued, and one by one, the residents began to agree that a mountain was a feasible and good idea. During the traditional fifteen-minute break after an hour of debate, Id stand outside smoking and notice more and more of the elders using the Practice Hills, exclaiming to loved ones that it didnt hurt their legs too bad to climb. Others proudly rattled off my list of new animal species that would flourish in the deep forests of our first mountain. Many predicted an influx of athletes to our country, which the politi- cians translated as increased revenue.
Construction of the mountain took a year. There were deaths. Sev- eral men hadnt properly prepared their lungs by jogging the Simu- lation Scaffolding, a massive structure made from wood and metal slightly half in height of the proposed mountain. A few workers simply couldnt handle the idea of a mountaina pile of dirt and gravelbringing them closer to the sky, and took their own lives via self-burial. Two men were murdered by residents desperate to ascend the mountain, which was related to something important I didnt ac- count for: building a mountain so grand that no one could touch it until it was finished, which is why Im currently here, alone, on the mountain.
Even Gwen had her muments. Im thinking of the night I found her in the backyard, lying flat on her back, crying. She had pasted her face with dirt, and she said her entire life was physically contained on one flat plane. I told her that was true, that the mountain would be completed soon. The next night, Gwen was again in the back- yard, but I didnt go out to bring her back inside. Instead, I watched from the bathroom window while Sammy brushed her teeth next to me, my wife running full speed through an open field and sliding

322	Shane Jones

stomach-bare across the flat grassy surface, her body halting into a crumpled pile of sobs.
Security was an issue. Many were arrested during dark hours for trespassing as the mountain grew with each truckload of dirt, and the tutorials that replaced the town hall meetings about what to expect when first climbing the mountain were attended less and less fre- quently.
But what really surprised me was that, after all the initial desire, the ridiculous drive to first experience the mountain, people not only stopped caring, lost interest, but soon came to view the mountain as a symbol of fear, and soon after, hatred. A black pyramid had been built, and it was my fault.
Opening day was a disaster. I remember standing at the base of the mountain in my best suit, surrounded by a half-crown of politicians, a fat red ribbon tied to two big trees, and looking out and seeing only Gwen and Sammy, a few of the other men and womens family mem- bers and children. Everyone bored. The protests to dismantle the mountain would come later. I cut the ribbon, turned, and applauded the mountain to soft background clapping.
On my first walk up, I too, wasnt very impressed. Sure, the air was better, and the forest sections with deer and squirrels were eye-catch- ing, but it didnt seem to matter much. Like everyone else, I missed our flat country because it was once just, and only that, a flat coun- try. I found myself walking in rings around the mountain, surveying others who shrugged at new foliage; children who rode their bikes downhill were only interested for several trips. Even they missed the uniqueness of a country once described in a tourism magazine as  . . . flatter, and sweeter, than a field of syrup-drenched pancakes.
What had I done?
I was prosecuted for crimes against the history of our flat, long ago once beautiful land. Thats to say, after several years of the mountain driving residents to madness, nights where they hand- dug dirt in pathetically collapsing piles at  their feet, many needed  to blame someone for destroying our country. I still remember the elderly man Johnson, even as I sit alone at the top of this mountain (Gwen, Sammy, so very far below, perhaps simply watching a ball roll


effortlessly along a flat field) looking at me across the long-forgotten town hall meeting room telling me that I would  be  the only friend of the mountain.
Im not sorry for what I did, because at the time it seemed like the right thing to do. My love for mountains was an infection. They say  I will be executed if I leave this mountain. They say I have made our country like every other country. No longer, the judge told me, can a man stand in a field with his family and spin in a circle seeing noth- ing but expanding grassy fields. I understand what Ive done. Sitting on this mountain peak, rubbing a leaf between thumb and finger, I know who will bury me.


opal oneinsect smallness, brown-gray girl, who scurries on spindly legs. so busy crossing empty spaces, sometimes she doesnt breathe. thus the miniature hiccups. staccato sounds that lurch from her throat. pinprick hiccups. and pit-pit patters, raindrop feet pocking patterns on the floor. little daughter. watch her flutter. little daughter. watch her twirl. she darts. she spins in circles. so pretty when shes flitting. a blur of brown-gray limbs that look like wings. but when she sleeps, her features crumple. eyes and nose so close together. fore- head furrowed. wrinkled chin. scrunched little face like a moth. edda thinks opal is more rubys daughter than hers.
eddasews seams with the sight of her fingers. sews  robes  for  all the priests. for prayer. for choir. for blessing water in baths of birds. edda with thread spinning under her fingers. toes tapping the pedal that powers the lever, that moves thread through the needle. the needle sharp. the needle thin. all that sewing, and opal always whisking away. past the edges of eddas glasses. to the peripheral  fog of muddy eyes. such frenzy. like eddas sister ruby. whose voice was always zip-zip zipping. throat erupting with words. a pulse that buzzed in eddas ears. and only ceased when ruby took glass on her tongue. melting it with her breath. the vaulted roof of her mouth bending it round. unlatch the lips. to release the rose-colored lens. that mends the muddy eyes. that colors the world. until the glass outlives its time. and the eyes get muddier still.


father babcocksinging his way through all the hymnals. kneeling in pew number eight. the singing such work hes split a seam in his robe. the flesh of his elbow pokes through. he sings to sister mau- rice who rubs oil into the altar. he sings to crucified jesus. and one- dimensional mary, piecemeal, soldered with lead, spider-line crack splitting her face in two. three sheep on a hill behind her. the sun intersects the hill, shines green on the bald of his head. a cap like peter pan. all he needs is a feather. bathed in the green of the window. singing a string of hallelujahs. a moth cries for help in the rafters. he looks but cant find it in all the wood.
opal onefond of the big machines rumble. purring needle. warm light from its tiny sun. when she comes close to her mothers fin- gers, edda blows at her shadow and opal is swept away, suspended on breath from her lungs. whisked to the window. where two little girls excavate worms from the dirt. opal might like to uncork a worm from the ground herself. but she is not a sister. so she stays inside and goads the needle. with her nine-hundred thread-count flesh. today too close. the tip of the needle catches her skirt. leg stitched into the seam, sewn into the robe. dark in the crease of the hem. ecclesiastical velvet, a mask that muffles her tongue. saliva leaks into velvet. cloth transposes to moss under her head.
eddafurious whir of the needle. manic winging of opals legs. the buzzing resurrects ruby. ruby five years dead. poor ruby. glass in her lungs, shards splintering into her blood. remember ruby clenching her fists. remember ruby pursing her chin. everything tight because everything hurt. because glass was etching her insides, burrowing into her organs. little razors under her skin. but edda didnt believe her, told her to stop her clenching or shed grind her teeth to nubs. she  was always shushing her sister. saying still those pulsing lips. now no sister to shush. only snot erupting from nostrils. spittle caught on her tongue. sogginess steams her lenses. and she doesnt see opal under her fingers. hears the thread knot. hears the cloth catch. then in the silence. the wind through the window. a bird in the mulberry tree.
antoinettemud. mud. mud. squishy squish in the hands. scrippity scrape on the legs. sands the bump of the elbow. rubs fur from little girl arms. softens the skin. eases the itch. covers sisters rosy smell. rosy sister squeals, keep the dirt to yourself. so dirty sister does. mud


on the worms instead. worms weave through the tines of her fingers. stretch over her palms like cello strands. their bellies smooth on her cheek. the pentamerous beating of hearts seeps into her skin, does jigs on her tongue. wheres opal? dirty sister needs a partner to dance to the rat-tat-tat of the worms. gone from the window. nobodys sister. drop a worm in the jar for opal. opal dances alone.
eddatangles and knots under her fingers. the pit-pit patter gone. floor space quiet. except the breath of the dust. everything still like rubble. except the bird perched in the mulberry tree. spreading her wings. puffing the fringe of her throat. hysterical chirping. manic scissoring beak. tizzied creature. like opal. dear god. wheres opal? has opal turned into this bird? oh ruby. sad suffering sister. eddas comeuppance earned. come back, edda calls to opal. the tree shifts its branches. the bird startles, leaps out of the tangle. the sky swal- lows her up. edda lurches. thinks exit. but her leg is snagged in velvet, velvet caught under the chair. cheek slams to the floor. rose-colored lenses splinter. eyes begotten by ruby. bowed by the might of her tongue. a shower of rose-colored seeds disperses. color leaks from the world. and edda escapes the house.
opal onemother crashing down. mother gone the house.  opal all alone. hung from the weave of scalloped threads. stitches pierce the toes, and cuff the bone to the cloth. lick the dark cocoon. lap the velvet smooth. fed on the juice of the tongue, velvet blooms into a coppice of moss. mossy meadows creep. over brown-gray skin. weasel under the arms. wrap wreaths around the womb. hold the daughter tight. rock the daughter still. cup mossy hands to her eyes, but leave the ears unblocked. let her listen to the rattle of rose-colored seeds. shells split open. seeds let loose a chorus of tiny screams.
helenshaking a jar of worms. the glass blurs pink with skin. an- toinette holds the spoon that does the digging. antoinette with dirt on her tongue. dirty sister. wash her down with the hose. then tack her to the clothesline. hung by her dirty hair. dirty sister points to edda. edda rushing down the road. to see the jar of worms. is that opal? she asks the children. antoinette shakes her head no. edda looks at the sisters. exactly the same. except one holds a jar of skin to her chest and the other holds fistfuls of dirt to hers. helen leads, and an-


toinette follows. they walk and edda goes too. quick little heel-to-toe steps. a parade marching. cobbled road to cobbled church.
father babcocksuch a day. a moth lost in the rafters. eddas opal lost in the clouds. terrible trouble. what to be done. first, the ab- ducted girl. ripped through a tear in the sky. send sister maurice to staple it shut. then rip a hymn from the hymnal. the one illogically transposed. too many sharps to be sung. scribble message to minor angel. send second daughter. send soon. fold into a bird. set out on the wind. such work, clerical robe splits up the back. never mind. the sewings halted. light a candle instead. now bless the fretful mother. bless the jar of worms. and also this: the dirt on dirty sisters tongue. eddahome again, but no opal. rose-colored seeds sprout rose- colored fruit on the floor. velvet rots to moss on the table. moss spills from metal mouth of broken machine. moss covered needle. moss covered thread. everything tangled. gather it  up  in a  bundle. stow it away in the cedar chest at the foot of rubys old bed. chest filled with lace. dowry for damaged daughters. one with muddy eyes. the other with glass in her lungs. lace knit with delicate fingers. fanati- cal mother. who knit with the bones of birds. her thread the silk of
spiders. so many harvested webs.
opal onedark in the thick of the moss. cedar smell feeds belly noises. hushes hiccups. cedar seeps into her tongue. rubys room with rubys ghost. mothers voice through the wall. singing the hymn sent away with the bird. opal wriggles around in the moss. moss holds tight to her leg. flexes her toes. reaches her hands through the lichen. gathers fistfuls of lace buried below. pattern of knots in her fingers. grandmothers worries like braille on her skin. worried the birds will forget the maps inked on their cerebellums. the clouds slip from their perches. moths knock their spines apart butting against the moon. so many worries wear opal out. smell of cedar swaddles. dear opal. sleep long, sleep well.
helenstars recite insomniac sermons. treetops moan from hold- ing so many leaves. owls cooing to ivy. ivy tapping morse code mes- sages into the brick. helen tiptoes through yards, avoiding pockets  of space where language passes through darkness. looking for opals. white rocks with rainbows glittering under their skin. granite pebbles


sprinkled in gardens. almost opal. the best she can get. pick prettiest pebbles. put in pockets. bring to eddas stoop. leave them with other gifts: mulberry pie. basket of fruit. gold leaf bible. and something left by dirty sister. her arm unstitched, fist full of dirt.
eddawakes with ache in her organs. crawls out of bed. feeds ache with rose-colored fruit from the floor. thinks of ruby. glass lungs and glass intestines. vessels of blood a lattice of crystal, brittle between her bones. icicle hair breaking off behind her. feet crumbling on cob- bles. glass teeth raining out of her mouth. coffin a pile of shimmering shards. for days, edda watched over the corpse. stroking the shards of shiny sister. finger pricked, sliver of sister entered her blood. grew into a daughter. now the daughter lost. edda goes to the door. but no opal. just offerings. who else but the clouds? hurl pie and fruit and bible back. the sky gives guilty gifts. gather the pebbles. gather the arm with a fistful of dirt. good gifts, come inside and sit on opals bed. father babcockheavy bellied clouds graze shadowed steeple. stones in  churchyard shiver. buried bodies call father babcock out. buried bodies wearing church clothes. cant get church clothes wet. father bab- cock with wheelbarrow full of umbrellas. pinwheel colors. sister maurice helps wedge them into the ground. look, the graves wear little fedoras.
little yarmulke caps.
watch out, sister maurice. that clouds dripping soupspoons. a fork hits father babcocks head. its edda on the steeple. fist full of kitchen utensils. hurling cutlery at the clouds. a war on the thief that stole her daughter. a daughter made from velvet and glass and guilt. sister maurice, huddle under the yellow  umbrella. keep  close.  well  wait  it out. a butter knife reels through the air, pierces the sky. gold leaf pages leak out of the clouds. catch one on your tongue. the gospel according to mark.
antoinettegold leaf pages raining. raincloud raining fruit. dig faster clumsy elbow. scoop harder wrong-handed hand. the one- armed girl is saving the world. dirty girl, you better hurry. or the worms will drown in psalms. have to shovel them out. helen, hold the jar a little closer. helen, help dirty sister dig, soupspoon for a spade. two hands only holding. hardly helping. lazy girl. now too many psalms in the soil. pink worms bloat under the weight of the word.


knock Helen over the head. lazy sister, you let them drown. swollen worms split out of their skin. tackle selfish sister. scoop out her ear with the silver spoon. selfish sister lies in the grass and yelps. tell her, still those pulsing lips. blessed be dirty sister. so says the word of the worms. go forth dirty sister. with helens hearing hidden. in a jar of muddled skin.
opal oneslumber slipping away. roused by a hum in her ear. grandmothers voice soft like steam. grandmothers voice thick like milk. opals tongue so dry. she suckles the moss, pulls water from its plumes. there there, sweet girl. rubys fingers in her hair. stroke her head. opal feels the glass. little pointed stars. quills that prick the scalp. shush, ruby says to the stars. allay that burning glow.
father babcocktravels cobbled street. umbrella for a head. um- brella knocks away shiny missiles. protects the tattered robe. and sac- erdotal crown. sabbatical leave from cobbled parish. to halt crusade of mournful mother. launched on odious clouds. father babcock stands on stoop, hand lifted to the door. paper bird falls through fingers. lands on jar at fathers feet. jar with an ear cupped in a cradle of worms. look, its solomons bird with wisdom at his beak. father bab- cock reads the bit on its wing. bird advises break the girls. and share their holy skin. father babcock runs. back to cobbled church. sounds the message from the bells. hailing christian mothers. with fleshly daughters in their homes. split the bread of your wombs.
antoinettewaterlogged worms. entrails spilled through a rift in their seams. to mend: roll garbled flesh against softest stone. roll with the palm of the hand. roll until flesh is smooth. then drop them back in the dirt. youll have to mend them alone. selfish sister sleeping. missing absent ear. no girls to help dirty sister repair the damage. all girls tucked in bed. nursing open  wounds.  mothers line the sidewalk. baskets on their arms. bringing gifts for griev- ing mother. unstitched from goodly daughters. stalwart soldiers, get used to phantom limbs.
eddasecond daughter. laid out on opals bed. pieces puzzled into a body. parts of goodly daughters. head of little lamb. stitch the parts together. fill gaps with rose-colored fruit. fill hollow space with peb- bles and worms. stitch on eyebrows. stitch on dimples. drip honey in


her mouth. kiss her downy forehead. hold her trembling hand. she is opal too.
opal onesweetness seeps into rubys room. crawls through key- hole. into cedar chest. smell of fruit clambers into nostrils, rouses opal. stirs the sap in her stomach. pricks the freckles on her tongue. so hungry she nibbles the robe. so hungry she bites the lace. she eats and she listens. quiet in the chest. the ghosts are sleeping. but there are nighttime sounds in the house. a clatter in the hallway. slanted rhythm of hobbled feet. the clunk of mistuned bones. not at all the delicate patter of opals delicate feet.
opal twoseeds rattle in her belly. pebbles clink against her ribs. percussive girl on mismatched legs. she shambles over cobbles. limbs aligned at awkward angles. matted tufts of woolly hair. all the girls throw pebbles, chase her into the mulberry tree. perched aloft, watch- ing the clouds. remembers dirt trickling down her chest. remembers granite marbles in her fists. and also the heat of a mouth. grains of   a tongue pressing the body round, and bleeding roseate swirls into the skin.
eddaopal in a tree. rose-colored fruit swelling through the house. clouds ogle second daughter. mother shoos away the clouds. ushers daughter down. come, help mother harvest fruit. pluck bulg- ing berries from the stems. squeeze fruit in iron pot. feed fire. add honey. stir until juice leaks from your thumbs. ladle into teacups. serve to girls with missing parts. watch them gulp. juice dribbles down their chins. stack teacups into tower. carry tower into house. so much work, mending malcontented neighbors. wears on mishmash body. stresses newly anchored limbs. rose-colored sap seeps from stitching, sweetens seams, scents the house. rose-colored worry seeps into the pillows. drips down the eaves. stains the walls.
opal onecrowded in a box with grandmothers worries, rubys ghost, mountain of moss. stiffness in the limbs. heaviness in the throat. moss for breakfast. lace for lunch. sounds of mother and daughter for dinner. indigestible bits: harden to glass in the lungs.
father babcocksunday sermon. parish full. mothers and damaged daughters, goodly glow around their heads. bonnets and capes to hide the missing pieces. munificent daughters, who give of them-


selves. tiny sips of wine. melt the bread on their tongues. father bab- cock presses prayers into their foreheads. closes his eyes and feels their breath on his nose. his robe, a gauze of tears and tatters. a moth weaves in and out of the holes.
antoinettepaper bird lands on finger. chirps. where are the worms? how to explain. the worms couldnt be mended. all that roll- ing. squashed their little heads. chirps. where is sister? sister making bonnet to cover empty ear. sister doesnt speak to antoinette. chirps. do i look like a bird? antoinette shakes her head no. unfolds it wing by wing. a message. rose-colored house. tea at noon. antoinette shakes off the dirt. puts on pretty dress. sews spoons to the hem. metal clinks against her knees. now she sounds like opal two. opal two can be her sister. they can clink and clack together. every day. through cobbled streets. go on, and clatter to her house. underfoot: the smoothness of stones. overhead: a paper flock of folded birds.
opal twodamaged girls, its time for tea. eddas gone for honey. opal two passes the cups. the girls sit in a circle, skirts whispering at their knees. a one-legged girl pours tea into her hollow stub. the one beside her (noseless) blows steam away from her cup. antoinette goes tinkle tinkle. her spoons clink as she sips. earless sister scowls. swats at dirty sister. topples rose-colored platter from opals hands. the cake goes splat. the platter splinters. rose-colored seeds disperse, fall at their feet, grow into fruit. earless sister hurls cake and fruit at opal. the others follow and opal flees the room. pebbles knock in her belly. seeds rattle in her chest. antoinette chases opal, juice dripping from her lips. she rounds the corner. but opals gone. which door hides the second sister? the right or the left?
eddajar of honey in her hands. just in time for tea. but all the little girls gone. except the one wearing spoons. rose-colored fruit drips from the ceiling. pink frosting splatters the walls. teacups top- pled. earl grey rivers run around archipelagos of crumbs. wheres opal? edda asks. opal one or opal two? either, edda says. antoinette shrugs, and the spoons hit together like bells.
opal oneruckus in the house. smashing plates. thumping feet. the door of rubys room screeches and slams. now the rattle of mis- matched limbs. a sliver of light at the top of the chest. the lid bangs


shut, and a girl falls through the moss. slips through pockets of lace and rubys ghost and grandmothers leftover thoughts. comes to rest by brown-gray sisters head. f ingers touch her scrunched little face. knees collide with spidery legs. opal two licks her sisters skin. belly hungry for f lesh. just a little bite. from the gauze of brown- gray wings.


1.
Tell a dream and people quit listening. Will you quit if I tell you mine?
Im sitting on a pew in a sanctuary full of worshippers. The min- ister is delivering the homily, and Im playing the violin. I intend to create a soft background music to the text, which is from the Old Tes- tamentdesert wanderings, tabernacle. I play in a minor key. From his elevated dais the minister looks down at me.
Thank you, he says. You play very well. But your gift is drowning out the gospel.
I place the violin in my lap.
When the boys have nightmaresParker about dead parents, Win- ston about robbersI tell them: we dream about what we fear will happen, not what will happen. I want to turn them away from the notion of the prophetic dream. But can I be honest? Sometimes I  just repeat the things mum told us and hope theyre true. Those pro- phetic dreams are all over the Bible. Nebuchadnezzar. Peters sheet of animals. Or Josephs dreams: Give him the name Jesus. Hie thee to Egypt. Drowning out the gospel? That sounds prophetic. But what gospel? It was the Old Testament. Drowning it out for others, or for myself? And what gift?


I heard from Dad last weekhe sold two of the paintings you left in the Dumpster to a gallery in Santa Monica. And one in La Jolla, on Prospect!
Everyone wants your work now. You need to know this, Ali: you were the one with a gift.
2.
Did I ever tell you about Parkers violin lessons? Eight free sessions from a college student who needed a child for her pedagogy class.    In eight lessons, Parker never bowed the violin. Instead, the teacher showed him how to lift tissues from the ground by curling his thumb and middle finger into an o to get the feel of the bow hold. After mastering tissue, Parker graduated to crumpling newspaper to build strength in his hand. The final lesson, I held an empty paper towel tube while Parker bowed through it to practice the proper angulation of the wrist.
Parker also had to learn the note names of the open strings: G, D, A,
	I made up an acronym to help him remember: Good Dogs All Eat. Like the treble clefEvery Good Boy Does Finealthough, accord- ing to the violin teacher, todays kids are demanding edgier acronyms: Empty Garbage Before Dad Flips, Even George Bush Drives Fast.
Before sending the violin back to the music store, I handed it to Parker.
Bow away, I said. Scrape up a ruckus.
But neither of us knew to tighten the knob that pulls the horsehair taut, nor did we find the round chunk of rosin, hidden in a plush red compartment inside the case. Parker bowed and bowed and never struck a note.
3.
Im thinking about joining this program. Its for people who arent recovering anything, and want to talk about the things theyre not recovering from.
For example: I am considering having an affair. In this program, I could talk about what it would be like to recover from it.
Does it shock you, that I would consider such a thing? It shocks


me. The older I get, the more I shock myself. Sometimes I make a mess in our bathroompowdered makeup on the floor, soap  left in a puddle in the sinkjust to see if Daniel will clean it up. So far, he always does. He says it gives him joy to serve me this way.
The program encourages people who worry about the fact that they have nothing from which to recover to look back and see what they can dig up. Think of things youd be embarrassed for anyone else to know. Write them down. Heres what Ive come up with so far:

	I tried bulimia for a month in high school. I used those long Benders padded hair rollers instead of my fin- gers, because they were soft, and because I didnt want to get vomit on my hand.
	I mark up library books in blue ink. I believe that Im helping the next person see whats essential in the text. I dont return the books until the notice comes from the collection agency. Then I buy the books, because I feel guilty about returning them all marked up.
	When I practice the piano, I imagine someones breath is taken away.
	My last semester at UCLA, Dr. Muller gave me an A for four independent study units in eighteenth-century poetry, a course for which I never read a page or wrote  a word. She gave me the A, she said, because shed seen enough of my work to know that, had I written the papers, they would have been As. I promised Id do the assignments over the summer. She lent me her books and, as I turned to leave her office, she pulled me back
and kissed me on the mouth. I returned the books along with a letter apologizing for never having finished, and thanking her for the grade, ten years later.

If I had told you these things, would you have  written She is the good sister, I am the bad on the mirror? In the bathroom, where your roommate found you, pills scattered on the tile around your head would you have called me?


I want to keep telling you. I want to tell you about this affair Im thinking about having.
I have considered it twice, adultery. (Lets use the weighty word; affair just trips off the tongue, doesnt it?) Both times I confessed the temptation to Daniel. The first time it was in grad school. Jeremy, one of Daniels MBA buddies, said hed go pick up the pizza for their study group, which was meeting at our apartment. I said Id go along to get drinks. When he parked we didnt get out of the car. Jeremy pointed to the moonlight on the hood of the truck. Bright, he said.    I leaned over and put my head in his lap so I could look up through the  windshield.  He  stroked  my  bangs.  Daniels a good man, he  said. That ended things.
The second time, I was thirty-three and the man was twenty-eight. Latino. His son and Winston were on the same mini-mites hockey team. At one of the games in Conejo, he told me, in my ear, that hed dreamed about making love to me. Id imagined the same thing was imagining it even then.
I said, Daniels a good man.
When I told Daniel about Jeremy, he punched the closet in our apartment and left a hole. When I told him about the Latino, he put Parker and Winston in the car and drove all the way up to Ventura.
Later, in bed, this is what Daniel said. Both times, this is what he said: Show me what you would have done with him, if you had.
I showed him. And I thought, How could I cheat on a man like this?
4.
I know what I look like on the outside. A perfect marriage, unstained faith. But I want to tell you something I cant tell people here (we left San Marino; Daniel took a transfer to Chattanooga, buckle on the Bible belt): I am a double-minded woman, unstable in all I do.
I joined that program, by the way. Were supposed to read books about people doing shocking things so that we experience them vi- cariously and, as a result, feel less like we ourselves are boring. Its cheap therapy.
Remember the matching Bibles mum gave us? What happened


to yours? I looked everywhere in your apartment, after. I still have mine, binding has split, but I hold the two halves together when I read. That double-minded thing is James on prayer.
In my case, the older I get, the further away from double-minded I become. I worry that, without any help, Ill be entirely single-minded. On the wrong side. Purity of heart is not to will one thing. Kierke gaard was wrong. Purity of heart is a lost cause: we will and will and will things, some of which align with God and some of which fly in his holy face, but worrying about this is also a sin. Otherwise, why did his son die? Wasnt it exactly so that I could rest easy about my lapsarian will?
Lapsarian. Now Ill show you how it is with me. I look up the word. Its not in my dictionary, so  I  look  up  lap.  It  has either  to do with a large genus of rough-pubescent herbs (lappula), or, more likely, it derives from the Latin lapsus fault, error, fall, slide. Back- sliding. Or the Greek laparos slack, loose. Unstable in all we do. Lap dancing is the next entry: seminude performer gyrates on  lap of customer. I look up gyrate, from the Greek gyros, rounded. Rounding my lapsarian hips. It is one of the shocking things Ive never tried, and therefore desire to try, against the will of God if it is not done overtop of Daniel.
But I want to lap dance on this man Ive met.
After youd left Bryan and were living back at Malibu Horizon (you were painting those giant butterflies on panels, which I found under your bedIve kept them all), you said during a family session that I was a Pharisee. Hanging on to the exterior trappings of religion out of fear. You were right. Even Im  impressed with my  exterior. But its the old whitewashed tomb. When I was twenty I thought my mind was a walled city. Now I know its a dark highway to which any- thing can obtain access. The only thing Im learning is not to trust it.
Do you want to hear more? I want to tell you more.

	Email from this man excites me. That bolded subject line. Sometimes I ask Daniel to hide my computer. He always puts it in the cupboard with the leftover buckets of paint.


	Remember that bikini I bought on  our Young- life trip to Newport? I shoplifted it in a boutique on
Balboawith $200 cash and Dads American Express in my purse. The owner caught me. She called the police, but decided not to press charges when our team leader told her I was a doctors daughter, from an upstanding family. When I paid for the suit, the owner wrapped it in pink tissue and tied it with raffia.

5.
Yesterday I dialed your apartment in the Palisades. I imagined, had you been there to answer, you would have left paint smudges on the receiver.
The mans name is Kurt. I met him at the Chickamauga Battle- field ten-miler in October, right after we moved; we finished the race together, a personal record for both of us. Hes got dark hair, like Daniels, but curly. He lives in NashvilleABD in theological stud- ies at Vanderbilt. Hes married, no kids. Neither of us is looking for anything. Were both in love with our spouses.
A group of us from the track club is training for the Country Music Marathon, and Kurt drives down every other weekend to run the river front with us. We distance ourselves from the rest of the group. We discuss sullied words like perfection, how it has retained its origi- nal sensea property of something that has been completedonly in music (a perfect cadence) and grammar (the perfect tense). We dis- cuss the ontological versus cosmological arguments for the existence of God; we discuss causation, whether the universe exists in esse like a house (deism, Aristotle) or in fieri, liquid in a vessel (theism, Aquinas). And then he says things that choke me up so that I have to stop and pretend to tie my shoe. How his grandmother died with her arms up, gasping Jesus, Jesus, my sweet Jesus. How waiting for God to answer prayer is like standing in line at the farmers market. The farmer is your best friend, but hes helping other people and seems not to notice you standing there, waiting. Hes handing out sunflowers and honey and fat eggplants and zucchini, and here you


are, his best friend, and hes ignoring you. You turn to leave and fi- nally, finally you hear your name. Wait, he says, and pulls out a basket of perfect grapes: the very thing you were there for. He says, I was saving these for you.
One evening around the holidays, we stopped to  stretch in front of a shop window that had a Christmas tree decorated with beaded oranges and lemons. The ornaments sparkled, and I said the tree looked beautiful, that the fruit was a noble attempt to mimic nature. He said that decorating a dying tree as if it were alive was an appro- priate emblem for todays church.
Our collective moral collapse goes way beyond personal ethics, he said. He was stretching his quads. He said: People say Christianitys just about a personal relationship with Jesus, but no one talks about rebuilding the ruins of Gods world, about getting politically active an entire continent dying of AIDS while American evangelicals are hunkered down trying not to commit any gross moral failings.
I dont know. I think I want to have an affair with him because Im in love with God. My body is so mixed up with my soul Im not sure theres a difference anymore.
6.
What was it like, to wash your hands of religion? I think I know what it would be like for me. Im running, its hot out, I move to the shaded side of the road. The run gets easier.
I had a dream about one of your paintings. The colors had col- lapsed into the bottom of the canvas, all mixed up in swirls. But the suggestion of the form was still there; if I squinted my eyes, I could make out what the painting used to be. There was this tiny thread running through the canvas and hanging off the bottom like the string on a slack puppet. If someone pulled the string, the image would right itself, the collapsed colors would disentangle and lock back into their proper places like stained glass. (That night I had read The Human Body to Winston; when he pulled the tabs, the bones, organs, and muscles slid into place.) The solution was already part of the painting. Someone just needed to pull the string.
That day on Westward Beach, the year mum died. I was twelve,


you were ten. Dad was throwing ice cubes at me, a plastic tumbler full. He was really pelting them, sitting low in his chair, wearing headphones. I took it. When one hit me in the head you knocked the glass onto the sand and ran, swimming out past the breakers. I sat upI could see you out there, treading water, sunlight on your wet hair, yellow tie around your neck. You were giving me the thumbs- up. Did you wonder, then, why I didnt follow you? Why I lay back   on my towel?
I needed his love more than yours.

7.
Today Kurt and I are supposed to meet for a run, lunch afterward. Its not a regular track club day. Its Tuesday. Daniels in Orlando on  a consulting engagement. The boys will be in school.
How do I know he wants to commit adultery? When we bump elbows, I say I have a cramp just so I can stop to catch my breath after the surge. When were stretching on the pedestrian bridge over the river, I hold on to the rail with both hands to keep myself from leaning against him, slipping my hands into his and asking him to pray for my purity of mind. Maybe Im the only one thinking these things, but his coming today makes me doubt it.
I wish I could say that all I want to do with him is have sex. That would be the shocking thing to say. But from where I am, I dont think its possible to go directly there. Adultery happens by degrees. I lean against his chest. Maybe try a kiss. A plain kiss would be enoughI think it would startle me back into faithfulness, the feel of someone elses lips after fifteen years. Wouldnt Daniel forgive me, for just a plain kiss?
The truth is, Im not sure Im even capable of such a gross moral failing as adultery. I think Daniel sees my body in palimpsest, current breasts superimposed over the breasts I had at nineteen. What would my breasts look like to someone seeing them for the first time, now, after two children? Could I let Kurt touch my C-section scar, when Daniel was the one who saw the incision open to reveal a still breath- less newborn? When he was there to squeeze my hand while the nurse pinched out the staples?
Daniel takes the boys fishing at the pond next to their school; he


shows them how to release the fish, first moving them back and forth underwater a few times to circulate the water through the gills. He tells them never to throw the fish back into the water: Reentry can be disorienting. After a fight, he sends me emails from work that say things like Sometimes its bliss, sometimes its blah. Always its you. We fight about sex now, because he wants to more than I do. I say its be- cause Im so satisfied, but its because, when we make love, its Kurts hands I feel, his voice I hear in my ear, and I feel so guilty about this Id rather not have sex. But Daniel feels better about himself, and about us, when we do. So I end up telling myself that the sin of the fantasy is less destructive than the sin of depriving him.
Its adorable, how Daniel worships you, my friend Eileen says.
But I want to be the worshipper. The one whose breath is taken away.

8.
Do you remember what a burden it was, to see your own sinfulness all the time in front of you? The remedy, they told us, was this: for every glance at your own sin, glance twenty times at the cross. Every sin you commit will make the cross appear bigger. The more sin you see in yourself, the more thankful for Christ you become.
This is what is supposed to happen in the life of a true believer.
Dad coming into our room to say good night. The hard, wet kisses all over our faces and necks; the way he cried and said mums name. I would sing This Old Man in my head to see how many verses I could get through. When it was your turnthose times you spit in his face and he pulled you up by the hair and said ungratefuldo you know what I was thinking? This old man, he played eleven, he played knick- knack up to heaven.
9.
I know you thought Id never have a dog, with three cats in the house. But we got a yellow Lab puppy when we moved. (We actually have land now.) Heres what Ive learned since we got Hank: raise a cat, you learn about cats; raise a dog, you learn about yourself. Yes- terday, from the kitchen, I watched Hank dragging this giant branch across the yard toward Daniel. It was so undignified, the joy of a re- triever, retrieving. He ran to Daniel in a crooked lope, head angled,


intent on proving that he was worthy of the call. And then the eager bounce away and turn back, driven by delight to do again and again what he was bred to do. He was dog fully dog, too absorbed in the joy of his task to think about dignity, or lovehe attained them for lack of trying.
Augustine says worship of God is the thing for which we were cre- ated, the only thing that will bring joy. And C. S. Lewis says (you wont mind if I quote him, will you?) our desire for heaven is the secret signature of each soul, the incommunicable and unappeasable want, the thing we desired before we met our wives or made our friends or chose our work, and which we shall still desire on our deathbedswhen the mind no longer knows wife or friend or work.
Every now and then, I feel this longing.
More often, I long to feel Kurts whiskers on my inner thighs.

10.
I remembered something else. Your rehearsal dinner at Geoffreys. Dad never even looked at Bryanwho I know, now, was stoned, his shock of long unwashed hair pulled into a low ponytailand that night when you said Dad hates him, sitting on the edge of your mat- tress, a joint quivering between the tips of your fingers, I saw the reason you were getting married. I should have said something. In- stead I flushed your bag of weed down the toiletbecause I thought thats what a good sister would do.
11.
Weve done it, Kurt and I. This is how it happened.
We met at the bridge, ran a couple of slow miles. Very little talk- ing. I said, You up for this today? And he said, Lets go back and have that lunch. We walked back to the bridge and I realized wed never walked before and it was incredibly sensual, the walking, it gave me time to experience our accustomed route in slow motion, to see and smell and hear things that, running, wed never seen or heard or smelled, and then we came to the tunnel at Rosss Landing.
There wasnt even a plain kiss.
But when you thought Id done it, was there a mument where your heart released me?


Reality is, I made a fool of myself. I leaned into him. He took me by the shoulders and pushed me away.
People need to see your faithfulness to God, he said, more than you need to see if God will remain faithful to you.
He spoke of Daniel, Parker, Winston, my parents, Daniels parents, all the people who know us, who receive our Christmas cards.
And he said, Im sorry if Ive misled you.

12.
Listen to me, all these letters. I think Ive made such progress, when I dont even know if Im capable of loving my own family. The read- ing to them, the snuggling, the driving to and from this practice and that music lesson; my delight in their achievements and their smiles; the clean, decorated home, the sexual fidelityI dont  think any of it is for them.
I never went to meet Kurt for that Tuesday run and lunch. (You might have known from that speech I wrote for him.) I stayed home and uprooted every invasive plant I could find around the border of our property. Hows that for clich? For trite symbolism?
Please dont stop listening to me.
Ive decided not to run with the track club anymore. I told Daniel about Kurt and asked him to forgive me.
For what? he said. You didnt do anything. For thoughts, I said. For considering.
For being human, he said.
And when we made love, it was comfortable. Predictable. Safe.   Ill never be shocking, Ali. Nothing beyond the ordinary temp-
tations. My attempt to prove anything to you only shows Im too invested in God to disengage. How could I leave him, when he saw every mistake Id ever make before I made them and said, Its okay, Ive got your back? An incomparable burden, an incomparable relief. Maybe this is a temporary thing. A postponement. But until the singing sun stops  turning me  looseuntil I  stop  noticing the  sub-
limeI belong to him. And to Daniel. And (I swear) to you.
Would you still be here if I had told you these things? Love me again, please, wont you?



The sleep would spit you out into mornings that were so harsh you would stay behind with the rustle of the tent, all of the canvas and the weatherproofing, still slick with dream and the sound of the sleeping bag rubbing on itself. Then you would know where you were and slowly come back into the world. Youd feel the rocks beneath you through your spine, feel like a princess high on a stack of mattresses, discerning, feel like a cowboy in the muscle, like a pauper and a king and every necessary piece of a conflicting whole. You feel your part in it. You feel like your roots might go straight back through the fabric and to the ground.
You feel the heat and where it ends, right at the line of your body, hard where it stayed on the surface and blurred where your energy absorbed into the dirt. You feel constant. You note the outline as proof of yourself when you shift your shoulders to the side and listen to the voices through the tent, close, close enough to bind together and bring themselves back to the source, to drop their guards and tell their stories, mix their children, lay the world out to dry by the fire and stare openly over the flame. You hear them with their pots and their pans banging together, mixed and matched, their coffee that youre too young to need. You hear the water being poured from one thing to the next and you know its freezing or its boiling and it came straight up out of the land. You know that it matters. You hear


the dogs barking, one, two, three, four, one for every family, dog- sized dogs, the hardware on their collars hitting a high note where they spin and carrying for miles on the clean lines of clean air. You can name each person by the footstep, by the motions muffled in their shirtsleeves and the layers underneath. You can hear their but- tons done up to the neck.
You turn over and you listen again. Now it is to the breathing of your brother, your sister, shallow and untroubled, sweet the way the mouth falls open and stays wet. You hear the teeth coming through the gums and you remember how you were there for the birth, the screaming and the wet, the first broken bone, screaming and wet, twisted ankles, your kisses on the stitches and scraped skin, scream- ing and wet, perfect life trying to stay in place with heels dug into the dirt as its pulled along, screaming and wet, screaming and wet. You want to reach down and wrap the wounds with yourself and the way a child breathes with your same blood rushing over his lungs you know you would. You would and you would never look back.
You hear the murmur of the voices again over the pans and flannel shirts, quieted for you and the children and other children in other tents with their own sweetness and their sleep. They quiet the dogs too and move the kettle just before it squeals, they heat the gristle of the meat and hot slick balls slide and pop from the pan. They think of you when they unpack small plastic plates, the odd ends of old cutlery, heat chocolate over a gas flame with their foreheads tilted into each other when they speak, their voices passed on the same breath, eye contact dropped while they watch the camp and breast- bones turned to the world because they would fight it for you. They would fight it and they would never look back.
You shock yourself now with the way that you are. Youve watched clothes float above the ankle in a season and youve watched boxes overflow with the things that you used to be, sloughed off, hauled away with thick-tipped markers taken to the flaps and sealed shut with tape in the garage. You didnt eat green this time last year and now you take your sugar a little less sweet. You sweat. You made a true friend and it took time. Youve grappled with honor and fell short and youre aware now that you can do wrong, real wrong, things beyond

346	Kayden Kross

a childs wrong and things you cant change. Some days you feel like every next step forces you to cause pain or ease it and the best you can throw at it is a blind guess. You miss. Youve killed things because you thought it would help and others for sport. Youve been drug in yourself, screaming and wet, thrown down in the dirt with the words that you couldnt keep. You grow. Then some days you know whats right on your own and you wonder how.
Yesterday you made a marker in your memory when you thought youd be safe if you stopped at the shore. You stood with your toes to the water and watched it lap and pool where they spread and watched the sand inch up and back again, never making progress but some- how already closer to landing somewhere else, becoming bone dry but never settled. You lurched. You watched a stick float in the dis- tance and needed an anchor, something to stay in place to show you that it could. For one long low breath you were able to hold on but then when you blinked it was somewhere else too. You exhaled. The wind moved and the water washed over you again and already the trees were a little higher. You threw your head back and faced the sky and watched the way the green never caught up to the blue, watched the way they spun when you tried to stay too still. You realized that it would all be gone in a mument and you pressed your lids hard over your eyes and flattened it down and made it clear. You knew it was worth holding on to because something new was happening and this was the last of another thing but you didnt know what. It was new like the first time you noticed, really noticed, the things that were hung on the walls of your home. The first time you saw that other people had lives outside of yours, everyone had a man named father and every mother was a daughter too.
You suck in your air suddenly, drowning, bobbing your head be-
tween the lake and tent. Then you are present. You count the hours backward to the stick moving away from you, impossible to pin down, cold washing over again. You face the way you cant look head-on at the sky for too long, the way each time you examine it there is a larger gap. You count how much closer you have come to the next ten years in the span of a breath. To twenty years. To thirty and thirty more and then you  see  each  nights  sleep  as the plank that you will walk


into the mornings change. You always knew but had never believed that you will grow eye level to your father. The children will grow out of themselves and more will come and then some will belong to you. They will pour from you and you will hollow yourself out trying to tuck them back in. You are aware, irrevocably, of things bigger than yourself. Bigger than your parents and your summer, cold things, op- portunistic and unjust things. Things that dont stop at the crosswalk on your street.
There is an impatience now with what you dont know and what you will learn. You fear you will learn why poor men go to the front lines of the rich mans war, why fur doesnt come cheap, why strang- ers shouldnt need your name and skin color changes at the train tracks. You will learn that not all dogs die quickly and that whole countries can be drug in by the cat, left on the back porch, all of the pieces fluttering and broke, your fault because you lived there. You will learn that right and wrong floats like a stick in the water and the waves you make moving toward it are the same that push it away.
When the tent wall falls down beneath the zipper and the morning spills in with the smell of bacon and soot you turn your face to your mother and for the first time see that she is flawed.




My nephew said to me, Whats your favorite thing?
He was five or six, a crazy-haired smirker tall enough to tug my shirt. He tugged my shirt. I scooped him up, gave a goofy look, and waited for him to get that Id given my answer.
Speak up, he said.
Speak up exactly what his ma would say whenever she had you where she wanted, at the wrong end of her questions. Awful ques- tions, the kind she used to cut you open. A lousy woman, but there she was, a piece of her in my nephews throatmy nephew whose fate it was to turn eighteen, get good-looking, and talk, spilling every- thing he thought he had, grabbing at my arm to tell me hed been cooked down and carbonized, was needing weight, real weight, the kind you carried in your chest. My nephew who would borrow my van (my suggestion), pack it with his buddies (my suggestion), and hit the road in May, in the summer before college was supposed to put him and us and all his friends in separate places.
His ma would slap me on the ear and scream, You think we think you didnt know?
I didnt know how long, how heavy: he would come back that August by himself on a bus, broke and sunburnt, a scar like a stain on his neck.
Speak up! he said, and tugged with both tiny hands.

Poof	349

We were at a clump of picnic tables in the woods, waiting, like every other knucklehead, for Auntie Rossellas mostaccioli to arrive in pans the size of suitcases. Gnats burst up wherever you walked. Cicadas went to town in every tree. Cousins from the South Side, Cicero, Kenosha, Carbondale, theyd all come out to the wooded western burbs to see our weepy Nanu turn ninety-five, wave his wrin- kled arms, and press any nearby hand to his face. Family, he was famously saying, tottering to each of us, you, and you, and you! while we stood, rooted, looking like bad sketches of each other, want- ing guiltily to go back to bocce, briscola, beers.
Speak up speak up speak up! You speak up.
You speak up! he shouted, so I gasped and mimed together the dreaded drill-fist, popping it from an imaginary case. He squealed. I switched the drill-fist on and tickled until he fell squirming into the grass, his armpits, his ribs, his little plank of a belly. It might have been I was trying to dislodge his mother.
My own uncle used to say, Some hearts, they beat in the belly. When I was growing up hed sometimes spend all day laying cement in the neighborhood and pop by for dinner, sweaty, crusted, un- invited, always looking like he was hugging what he said. My ma,  charmed, would rip open an extra pound of pasta. It didnt make a difference, thered be hardly any leftovers. Thats not to say my uncle was too much. He just made the many messes on his plate disappear, so gracefully, in breaks between grins. This alone astounded me. At the time I couldnt clean my plate, Id push the food around and push the food around.
Hed tell a story about his job, about almost losing it. What can you do?
My ma would shake her head but be beaming. When you gonna get yourself together?
Burners on, hed say, pointing. When she turned to look hed switch our plates.
In this way my uncle was a magician: pasta, jobs, wives, money.
His whereabouts: poof.
Hes in me more than in my brother, whose plates he never

350	Joseph Scapellato

switched. In the him in me, I hope, is a heart inside a belly. Even if it leads to poof.
Ill say it: I hope its in my nephew, too. However low this hope, however lousy, however much my brother and his wife wont answer when I knock or call or write.
When the kid came back that August and was not himself, even his ma couldnt cut to how or why. Hed been opened up and emptied by a sharper blade than family. Hed looked at everyone with eyes that werent anybodys.
Hed said to me and me alone, Ill tell you when I have it.
Before the month was up, he left again. I think he took a bus. Not a word from anywhere.
I let him drill me back, his knuckles lost inside my love handles.
His mother was watching from a hundred feet away, flanked by her skinny cousins. Their faces gorgeous.
Show him good, said my brother, walking by, his arms crammed with spent beers. Then gone.
The little guy leaned into my throat. Ill talk, I choked.
Speak up!
Instead I hooted Gotcha! and stood fast, snatching his ankles. He kicked but I swung him up and off the ground, into circles, watching the woods and my family smear along the barrel of his body, Nanu, trees, cards, bocce. He was laughing, his eyes tearing. Let go, he shrieked, you let go!
You sure? Im sure!
Ill do it! He screamed.


The new guy walks right through Accounting eating a rat on a stick.
Roasted rat on a stick. Kid you not.
I see him first, cant believe my eyes. Hes content and happy, eating that rat on a stick. Like a kid at the fair polishing off a corn dog, humming happily as he parades past me and Danzig with this rat on a stick, his teeth tearing away at the meat, like it was the most natural thing in the world.
Danzig stands up, his eyes giant, his mouth open. Hey, he mut- ters, and thats all he can say.
The new guy keeps walking.
Danzig walks over, invades my space. Who was that? The new guy.
That thing had legs. Danzigs breath is atrocious. Its like he just opened a jar of rotting meat and sour milk. You see that thing?
Gently, I push him away. That thing was a rat.
Danzig looks at me like Im the one with a rat on a stick. You can nearly see his mind doing the math.
That was the new guy.
The new guy eating a rat on a stick.
Weve all been hearing great things about the new guy. Fitzroy cant stop talking about the new guy.
The new guy, some kind of out-of-the-box thinker.


Fitzroys new genius.
Finally Danzig says, You think they taste like chicken?

The new guy doesnt look like us. He has this whole I-dont-give-a-shit scene going. Long dark beard that comes to a point near his sternum. Big head of black, wavy hair. Big, thick tribal tattoos on his long, muscular arms. Dark sunglasses, worn indoors. Heavy, charcoal- gray jeans, worn-in T-shirts and big black boots. Yeah, hes a pretty jarring sight around here.
I wish I could dress like the new guy. Then I stop and ask myself, Well, could I? Sometimes these days, I wonder what people  would do if I came to work rebel-stylemy dick and balls flapping in loose jeans, my feet free in hemp flip-flops, my T-shirt untucked, my whis- kers out for everyone to see.
God, that would be something.
Lately, Janice from Finance keeps bugging me for the master doc for the Procurement PMO. Shell come over with her face in a knot, all worked up, snapping, Waddlington needs the PMO master doc for the P5s by EOB. And if you cant get the Q1 POD results sooner, then well need to put the P6s into the FOD, and that includes the L2s and L6s.
Danzig will holler from across the aisle, And dont forget the SWAT reports for the L10s and L16s in FOD.
My throat is so dry, I feel like itll crack.
Sometimes when Im passing Fitzroys office, I look in and see the new guy at the white board, sketching something outGod knows whatand Fitzroy is sitting there listening, completely attentive, nearly blown away, like theyre uncovering the secrets of the universe right then and there.
Yeah, the new guy doesnt worry about L16s in the FOD. Or Janice from Finance. Im sure of it.

The new guy is sitting in the break room, wiggling his tongue through the rat, getting at the meat. Penny from Legal walks in, gives him a double take, drops her Swedish meatballs, and trots out of the break room. We can hear her retching in the womens room.


We watch him from afar, through the glass. Its a stunt, Danzig says.
Maybe, I say, maybe not.
Oh cmon, you think he just loves rat? More people join us.
Gasps abound.
Several folks have to turn away.
Well, I say, in Africa, a field rat is a real treat. Millions of people eat them.
But this guy isnt African.
So youre saying only Africans should eat rats?
Danzig stiffens. Im saying, this is America. People dont eat rats in America.
Carol from the second floor says, But Fitzroy loves him.
Out-of-the-box thinker, I add. Thats what theyre saying. Out- of-the-box thinker, out-of-the-box thinker. On and on and on.
Barbara from Analytics joins us and squints into the break room. Thats Fitzroys new guy. She watches him. Some kind of rugged genius.
Danzig snaps, Genius? Who said that?
Well . . .  Barbara watches. They say Fitzroy loves him. Fitzroy is the bossthe bosss bosss boss.
Whats he eating? Rat.
Rat? Barbara straightens her blazer and clears her throat. Well see about this.
She charges in.
We all look at each other and decide to follow.

Barbara stands over the new guy, hands on her hips. So youre the new guy.
The new guy looks up, licks his teeth. Slowly,  he grins. Yeah. He says it nice and slowlazy-California-surfer style. Thats right.
Barbara seems unfazed by the glistening rat skeleton thats now on the napkin in front of them. Where are you from?
The new guy pulls his head back, grins. All over.


Barbara frowns. No I mean, where were you working before this? The new guy grins wider. Theyre nice teeth. Long story.
I like this guy. Its like hes saying, Fuck you, lady, smiling nice and easy the whole way.
Danzig feels brave now. He leans in, over my shoulder. So whats the deal with the rat?
New guy turns and looks up at Danzig. Long silence.
Well . . . The new guy waits extra long. . . . what do you think?
Danzig studies him. His voice is high from the stress. Fitzroy  loves you.
Those dark shades, that grin growing.
They say youre some out-of-the-box thinker.
He smiles and nods, like hes saying, Okay, man, its cool. I hear you.
Barbara bursts out, What are you going to do here? Slowly, the new guy turns to her.
Are you familiar with the California Stink Beetle? Barbara squints.
Well, the Stink Beetle can thrive in some of the worlds harshest environmentslike a deserteven though its this big juicy insect. So the question one might have is, What gives? How can this black beetle thrive in a place like that?
Barbaras still squinting.
So heres the deal. The new guy straightens. The deal is, the Stink Beetle innovates. At dawn, it drinks from the moist air simply by positioning its rear into the breeze and opening its anus. His smile is gone. The new guy is dead serious. Now thats innovation. He looks up at Barbara, an eyebrow emerging from behind the shades. So the thing is, maybe its time to open your own anus to
the moisture that breezes over you each and every day. Barbara loses the squint. Shes frozen, speechless.
Danzig says, So it stinks or something?
The new guy turns to him. You fuck with the Stink Beetle, itll stand on its head and expel some seriously nasty gas.
Danzig mouths the words.
The new guy folds his arms. Yeah, I dig the Stink Beetle.


*	*	*
We circle the wagons at Armadillo Willies.
Danzig is working on a chicken wing, his face shiny with grease. I cant believe that guy.
Barbara pulls the meat off a baby-back rib, slurps it in. Her cheeks bulge as she chews. After a big swallow, she says, Someone should file a report with Business Conduct. She thinks about it and squints. Eating a rat, saying that to me.
I stick to listening. I mean, what good will protesting or  whin-  ing do? The new guy is gold. Fitzroy loves the new guy. Nothing is  gonna happen to the new guy.
Barbara gazes into space a mument, thinking. You think the new guy was repeating something Fitzroy said about me?
What do you mean?
I mean, do you think Fitzroy wants me to open my anus? You know, innovate?
Danzig leans over the table, makes a weird smile, and I fixate on the chicken strands wedged between his teeth. Either way, we need to do something out of the box.
Barbara snaps, But what?
Doesnt matter what. Just needs to be out of the box.
Barbara nods, her eyes almost crossing. Thats the thing now.
Out of the box. We need to get out of the box. So what do we do?
Long silence.
Finally I say, How about eliminating some of these reports no one reads?
Silence.
Barbara says, What if we shaved our heads bald? Danzig frowns. Smells like a stunt.
Well, lets keep the ideas coming. No one says another word.

Next day, Fitzroy scares the shit out of me.
He walks right into my cube.
This is unusual. There are about four levels of management between


us, and I always figured he didnt even know I existed. So now Im thinking, Hes gonna can me. Fitzroy does that a lotcan people, lay them off, by the thousands. But the thing is, he always has HR do it.
He leans over me so I have no chance to stand up. Hey, Roger.
It is only now, at this close range, that I see how bloodshot his eyes are, and how deeply sunken they sit in their darkened sockets. His skin is marked by broken capillaries, his gray hair is thinning, and his neck is so gaunt that he reminds me of a turkey. And hes only forty-three.
Morning, sir.
He puts a cold hand my shoulder. What are you doing today?
I stumble. Oh, Im putting a few PLDs into the FOD for the Q3
He blinks, cuts me off. Dont worry about that today, okay? Okay.
Yeah, I want you to join us this afternoon. Okay.
Fitzroy tells me Ill be joining him and the new guy for an after- noon offsite. Something the new guy set up.
Itll be fascinating, he says, a grin developing. Just us three?
He nods. Dont worry about that. Itll be fun. Whats the topic?
Fitzroy lifts an eyebrow. Preemption.
I want to ask, Why me? But I can tell he wants to leave already, and I dont want to annoy the bosss bosss boss.
I nod, as if to say, Cool.
A toothy smile spreads across his face. Damn, those are long teeth. Dark, too. Probably all that coffee he drinks. Hell, his admin has a steamer outside his office so she can make all those espresso shots he throws back throughout the day. If I drank that much  caffeine, Id be vibrating.
What are you, by the way? Sir?
What are you, six-four? Six-three?


Oh. I feel my brow crinkling. Weird question. Im around six- three, I guess.
Fitzroy nods, looks away like hes embarrassed. Yeah, I was just figuring you must have played ball in school. He forces a smile. I mean, you look like it.
Yeah, I played a little. Tight end? Linebacker.
He brightens. Even better.
I look down. Its always weird talking about my football years. I bet you were a bouncer on the side, eh? Easy money.
I  chuckle.  Nah.
Oh well, linebacker is good. Fitzroy turns away. Come to my office at ten, okay?
You bet, sir.

Its easy to find the new guys car in the parking lot. Its a beige, mud-caked Oldsmobileprobably a 72 or 73surrounded  by  a  sea of candy-colored SUVs, BMWs, and Hondas. I scribble the plate number and call my wifes cousin at the DMV. The  name he  gives me doesnt match. AliasI knew it. So I call my buddy in HR, the buddy with access to the name of every employee whos ever worked at this dump, even the ones who were laid off eight years ago on the other side of the country.

Were so deep into the Santa Cruz Mountains that if we had to yell for help, no one would hear us.
We have fern branches tied to our backs, green grease smeared over our arms and faces. The new guy has removed his shades; hes got enormous green eyes. Intelligent eyes.
Put it that way, he whispers, and points Fitzroy and his crossbow away from us. And be careful.
This is our offsite, hiding behind a cluster of redwoods, waiting for deer.
I ask, So what did you do at Robards International?
The new guy shoots me a glare, whispers, Paradigm rationalization.


What the hell kind of job is that?
Regardless, hes a liar.
You work with a guy named Livingston over there?
Its a trap, and the new guy isnt biting. He waves the question away, shushes me.
We sit in silence for twenty minutes. Fitzroy  is  still focused on the forest before him, still gripping the crossbow, still waiting, his upper lip curling back in some kind of demonstration of predator lust. Nothing, he announces through gritted teeth, his eyebrows arching. I see nothing out there.
Finally, the new guy tells me to walk up the hill, travel east a bit and then loop back down in hopes of flushing out deer, sending them toward Fitzroys position here.
You sure? I ask.
Just be open to the process.
Fitzroy is still staring into the forest, his crossbow still pointed outward. Stay here, Roger.
The new guy looks flustered, throws his hands up.
Fitzroy turns toward us, the crossbow turning with him. Because if you
Thud.
. . . Oh, shit.
I blink twice, look at the new guy. The end of an arrow is sticking out of his chest. His eyes widen as he sways from side to side. He tries to spin, and I see the arrow tip sticking out of his back. Both sides of his T-shirt are darkening, and hes coughing up blood.
Fitzroy cant suppress a grin. Oh, shit. A giggle escapes as he peers into the new guys eyes, takes a step closer. Sorry, man.
New guy drops to his knees. Fondles the arrow with both hands, smears the blood with his fingers.
Fitzroy drops the crossbow, turns to me, forces a serious face. Its so obvious hes enjoying this. Fitzroy, the predator, preying on the prey. Thank God you were here to see this. No one would believe me, otherwise.
The new guy topples over. Theyd think I murdered him.


I back away.
The new guy gasps for air.
When in fact, all we have here is a very unfortunate hunting ac- cident involving an established executive and a disgruntled, laid-off employee posing as a change consultant.
I nod.
And a witness, he says, cheerful. A most important witness.  I find myself saying, It was an accident, sir. I know.
The new guy is in spasms.
Fitzroy turns from me, walks to the new guys big backpack that   is propped against a redwood. Why dont you go find some help, Roger? Ill see if I can resuscitate him.
I mumble something.
He peeks into the backpack, pulls out two pairs of handcuffs, then a buck knife, then some rope, and then a Taser gun. I knew it. He was gunning for us, Roger. He looks up to me. Go, Roger. He doesnt have much time.
I back away. Okay. And Roger?
The new guy gurgles and chokes. Yes, sir.
Roger, my guess is youd love to retire early, really early. He pauses, bites his lip. If you had sufficient funds.
Oh, well . . . I just
He stops me. Roger, consider it done. All this blows over, well send you on your way, set you up. Put you on retainer as a consultant, help you create that life you always wanted.
I dont know what to say.
Okay, you need to get help, Roger.
I turn and head up the hill, toward the car, where I can flag down a motorist. But after a hundred feet or so, I look back. Fitzroy is kneeling beside the new guy as he smears the blood over his hands, around his mouth. Hes not helping the new guy, but hes saying something to him. I cant hear a thing, but I can imagine the words. Something like, You think youre smarter than Stephen Franklin Fitz- roy? You think I wouldnt do my own background check? You think I


didnt see this coming the first week you arrived, that I wouldnt kill you before you could kill me? Dont you realize I was just playing with you, just toying with a loser?
Its hard to imagine him saying anything else. I continue up the hill, panting.
The new guy wanted to kill us.
I reach the top, head down the other side, and breeze through the forest, wondering how long Ill need to wait before I can tell Janice from Finance that Im finished being her bitch, that she and her FOD reports can fuck off, that our relationship is EOLd ASAP.
Finally, I reach the road.
Approaching Fitzroys black Beemer, I imagine the new guy stand- ing there, leaning against the front fender, legs crossed at the ankles, the shades back on. Hes saying, Hey man, youre better than this. Way better than this.
And I say to the moist air thats washing over my newly opened anus, Thats what you think, dude.





I
I pad around my house in the morning, turning on faucets and lights to assure myself that the apocalypse is still self-contained over a thousand miles away at Mothers doorstep. Texas border states have already begun rationing plans. Through their television noise, scien- tists and preachers scramble to understand such centralized tragedy, use incantations and formulas to predict where this may go if it ever leaves Bonita. Some claim aliens.
II
To be clear, Im not speaking in metaphor when I tell you the end of the world began on my wedding day. Leaves littered Mothers lawn. Dried bits the grasshoppers left behind turned Bonita parking lots and roads a pale green ocean. A case of wine left too long in a truck exploded. Trees stood naked, bare arms raised to the sky as if seeking answers.
Mothers temperature gauge read 112 that day more than a year ago, but I was in love, if sweaty, in my sundress. Outside, grasshop- pers crunched underfoot. We kept a broom handy to push them out- side, letting three in for every one swept out. Mother, embarrassed, ran her well dry trying to turn brown grass green, as if the weather


and bugs were a reflection on her and her housekeeping, not a sign of what was to come.
III
I fill the bathtub each night. When the faucet squeaks to life come morning, I water the plants, fill the dogs bowl, and empty the tub, watching the clear water swirl away to nothing. Plant stalks swell and leaves droop. I wander out to check the sky for dangerous cloud formations, kneel and place both palms upon the ground. Neighbors wave, keep walking. Leaves shift in the breeze, lazy and unconcerned. My Idaho sky is blue for days. Rainbows come and go in the sprin- klers twirl.
I dont know if a thunderstorm would make me feel better or worse at this point, so I turn on the television. Bonitas apocalypse is grow- ing old for the rest of the country. No news for almost a week.
IV
Its probably true that we all have our own self-centered versions of when this started, when we decided to believe, or stop believing in coincidence. The tornado that ripped off a section of Mothers roof, causing her to box her sequined tops and fall upon her knees, was weather and nothing more in my mind. Her fundamentalist upbring- ing wouldnt allow her the luxury. She heard the roar of the wind twisting metal and dislodging bricks. The sky took her bobtailed cat and left her half a home. She was chastened by the rain that pelted her carpet, only to watch the clouds dry up with not a drop of relief for months on end. She looked to God for answers. As far as I could tell, he wasnt speaking, so she looked behind her, made a list of trans- gressions and underlined mother in red.
I thought I had run far enough away to be sure I saw things back in Bonita clearly. I couldnt have known that, in my flight, I would for- ever keep one eye over my shoulder, and in doing so would circle back again and again. When the second earthquake hit, shortly after the first round of fires Id called plain old bad luck, I knelt in my closet and tried piecing together my own prayer, unable to remember anything beyond Thy kingdom come. Disaster close to home had not given the words new meaning, so I left supper to burn on the stove, called home.


V
I work her every way I can from my Idaho kitchen to hers, our voices ones and zeroes pinged through space satellites. I tell her well load the horses, haul them across the canyons and mountains, and put them in the backyard. Bring your  chickens. Just  brick and wood,     I say of the three-bedroom home shes scraped for, the patched-up house whose mortgage will probably outlive her. I hear her switch the phone to the other ear, bang a door shut. I brag on the depth of our towns reservoir and the snow at the tip of the mountains you can see in August. A preacher buzzes radio noise in the background. Ive never even heard of a tornado in Idaho, I say. You can carry your gun on your hip in the grocery store! She sits there, jaw set in silence I can see. ThenYou know the story of Job, she says. What if God picked the wrong person for the job?
VI
NPR f inally runs a story, a color piece on Bonitas Riders for Christa group that takes its message almost as seriously as its method of delivery. Before all of this, they opened rodeos per- forming cowgirl tricks against the backdrop of f ireworks and God Bless the U.S.A. Now sword-packing Riders sit sentry at each of the cardinal directions outside of town, certain the Four Horsemen will gallop down from the heavens any day in need of spangled escort. Steve Inskeep says a few have liberal enough interpretations to pack rif les, which has created something of a rift, and those Riders man only the southern outpost, where the groups leader- ship think the Horsemen least likely to appear. Steve outlines sto- ries for tomorrows program in the event the rapture doesnt occur overnight. Then he cues Blondie. I pick up the phone to make sure Mother hasnt found herself a sword.
VII
Every day before she died, my grandmother bowed her head and prayed for Mothers gambling and carousing to stop. She prayed for Mother to humble herself before the Lord and care about what good Christian people thought. She prayed for Mother to get out of that mess she was in,


as she referred to Mothers secondand then thirdmarriage. Both adultery in my grandmothers eyes, though my only memories of Moth- ers first (and God-recognized) husband are the blue welts he made of her eye, the way the bruises bloomed purple, then yellow on her chest and back, the way he swung the red suitcase as he walked down the hallway of our apartment building, as I followed, crying for him to stay. Grandmother prayed for Gods love to rain like fire from the heavens. I wonder if this is what she had in mind.
VIII
There will always be those ready to don a cowboy hat and ride the bomb down with a yippee-kye-yay, those who sell hats and work the levers. While the Bible church holds twenty-four-hour prayer meet- ings, sinners filter to the casino and the VFW, filling up the dark places, no need to conserve, no need to conceal pent-up desires. Faithful to no end the time is nigh.
Mother refuses to step into a church, but shes taken to covering her head, wearing long dresses. I find myself in the unexpected posi- tion of suggesting she go to the casino to keep some semblance of normalcy. She wont hear of it. Mysterious are the ways.
IX
I get an all-networks-busy recording and punch end and send until I get a crackly ring and she picks up. I dont tell her Im half-believer. I insist that, while surely some kind of geo-seismic shift has occurred beneath her very feet, this does not necessarily mean that the Christian God of Fire and Fury has returned. I tell her it probably has to do with all the oil Texans sucked up. Arrogant Texans messed up the tilt of the earth, perhaps. Somehow altered weather patterns, I say. I was never good at science, and she reminds me of this. I duck, jab. Ask if shes taken up embroidery or churning butter, ask if Laura Ingalls is the First Saint of the New Apocalypse. She sets her jaw. Okay, the end of the world maybe, I say, but show me this God.
X
What do I love the way I used to love the mystery of my mother, her strength in suffering?


XI
Today I ask if she wishes shed left before it got so hard, come to live with me and my husband in the high desert where we could listen to the end of the world over the airwaves and cook frittatas still. This  is what we do when there is nothing new to report and the line goes quiet. This is how we push back at the distance and the catastrophe. Do you wish youd stayed, she says. I am afraid shes getting religious.
XII
CNN runs a segment on the Mayan calendar. A reporter runs around interviewing people in front of the Mall of America, asking for views on the Texas apocalypse and the End of Time. I wonder what the Mayans had in mind as they toiled, fashioning stone chink by chink: a twenty-four-hour news cycle, complete with a running Twitter ticker of the apocalypse?
An African American woman claiming Mayan and celestial ances- try speaks during the second half of the segment. She wears a purple tunic with strange lettering. Says this whole Mayan hysteria is a big misunderstanding. The Mayans didnt create a calendar, and 2012 isnt the end of time. They were measuring divine light, outside of time. One the back of a Chinese take-out menu, I try to doodle light and circles of time. In the end it all looks like lightning bolts and cyclones.
The anchor seems relieved until the Mayan lady places a hand upon her polyester arm and explains that just because the Ancients werent concerned about our modern world, doesnt mean the events in North Texas arent indicative of whats to come. We must prac- tice seeing with our eye-eyes, she sighs, before we can see with our mind-eyes. And then: North Texas is now. When she smiles into the camera, she seems sad for us. I hear my husbands key in the door, home from giving a final, and I turn off the television, fold the menu into a tiny square and cram it into my back pocket.
XIII
My husband is a skeptic. He thought the grasshoppers were a nui- sance last August, nothing more. Of the heat, he said, its Texas in


August, what did you expect. When I speak to Mother, he opens the computer, goes quiet. As soon as I hang up, he  closes the laptop,  and his sigh misplaces the rest of the air in the room. I dont think he does this for my benefit. I think he does not appreciate what he cannot tie down with reason. I think this is why he loved me in the first place: I am a good challenge.
XIV
At f irst nobody danced at the wedding, or Mothers Event, as I began calling the night. The Legion Hall f illed with Bonitans and relatives of Mothers third husband, the one who died in a freak accident when his pony horse spooked into the crowd at the track, crashing into the pane glass window of the V.I.P. suite, crushing fancy hats and knocking my stepfather stone cold dead. Few friends made the trip to Texas, and when I bemoaned the fact, Mother knocked back her white zin and said, Yes, its too bad you have a family that loves you.
As ladies in tight jeans and men in broad-brimmed straw hats streamed in, they brushed one anothers backs, checking for grass- hoppers, made quick for cold Dos Equis and napkins to dob sweat. The swan-carved melon soon sat empty, save the black seeds. People fanned themselves. Mother cocked her brow toward the empty dance floor, so I gave up on Rebirth Brass Band and put  on  the AC/DC that she had insisted I load onto the playlist. As soon as the bells began to ring out and the guitars snarled to life, cowboys began set- ting down drinks, clasping hands with their women, marching bow- legged toward the rented speakers. I took a hard pull off my beer. She knows her crowd, my husband said.
I told you, Mother said, and led us onto the sawdusted floor, Hells Bells echoing off the walls. My husband shrugged his shoulders, pushed up his glasses, and proceeded to get down, banging his head and bouncing his ass off Mothers as I clapped them on. In those sweaty three minutes, Mother was righteverything was, somehow, just right. But soon Id had two beers too many, and barefooted and half-cocked, I was out Bonita-ing the Bonitans. I woke up the next day as ready as ever to leave and never come back.


XV
I get the all-networks-busy signal for two days before I decide I have to go. My husband calls the plan hopeless and vague. He says we need to save our resources. He quietly reminds me of my job search. When he asks me what my goal is and I shrug, he walks away, comes back to say she is a grown woman who can take care of herself and never has been inclined to listen to reason. Thats easy to say, I blab, when its not your mother living on the brunt end of the beginning of the end of the world, which is mean because his mum died years ago.
Being the man he is, he agrees to go to Texas if I wait for him to enter final grades and agrees to use his credit card to pay for the gas that has skyrocketed. Despite rationing, you can still travel freely if you have the money and dont live at the end of the world. He tells me I am about to put an end to that freedom on both accounts. Then he squeezes my hand hard and begins to pack.
I pack with one hand, work the phone in the other. Sending, ending. Sending. I  fill my  backpack  with Ziplocs  and  wool  socks. I check the tent for stakes. My husband packs a few shirts and un- derwear and fills his bags with books on Greek philosophers whose names I cant pronounce. When I come in with the orange cat-hole trowel, he takes it gently from my hand and puts it back in the garage. I dont know how to pack for the end of the world, so I imagine a backpacking trip.
XVI
Mother picks up as were driving through the red rocks of Moab listening to a classic rock station. Its Don Henleys birthday, and every station seems to be in on the awful celebration. When I hear her voice, I punch off the radio and sit up. Everything is fine, she says. A trembler, not too big. She  tells us to  turn around and go  home. Or head westeveryone should see the Grand Canyon, she says. She sounds tired.
Why dont we all go see it together, I say. You know, she says, its just a few miles from one rim across to the other. Imagine all that sky, she says and fades off before adding, People die all the time trying to get across.


Were coming, Mama, I say and snap the phone shut. I lean my head back and close my eyes. All I see are burned-out buildings and twisted metal. My husband touches the side of my face and pushes the car faster.
XVII
A fierce wind greets us when we pull to the top of the hill outside of town. A line of delivery trucks waiting to move into Bonita has us backed up alongside the roadside park. From the looks of it, the park was recently a happening place, but news teams have mostly aban- doned makeshift camps. My husband points out that Texans favor a liberal definition of the term parkits just a couple of cement slabs with picnic tables and a trashcan off the highway, usually devoid of much else besides prickly pear or bluebonnets in springtime.
I point to the farthest table, tell him this is where Mother and I came to watch the sun set when I was a girl. I absorbed as much at that time as I could, that time after work and school before she reap- plied her lipstick and walked through a cloud of perfume and out our front door where shed  spend the night dancing the sun back up as   I slept.
Now tarps pop and snap in the wind, strain at the lines holding them to earth. One guy in a dingy brown suit huddles on a bench squinting into his phone. We roll down the windows despite the wind. A brown beer bottle rolls across the cement slab. Plastic bags flutter against the table legs, trapped just east of the freedom stretch- ing ahead on the endless Texas prairie.
Toward town, things appear just about normal, aside from a gas well that billows orange flames and hazy, electric smoke. My husband is taken aback by the sight, but I tell him this happens from time to time in oil country, even when there isnt an apocalypse going on.
XVIII
Mother, speaking on good authority I assumed, had always told me nothing good happened after midnight. I have a feeling thats when I was conceived. I know it was sometime the summer before her ninth- grade year, not long after she started to sneak bell-bottoms to school


where she changed out of her holy-roller dress and put on eyeliner she stole from the drugstore. I can imagine her scrubbing her eyes red to get the makeup off, rolling the jeans into a neat ball and putting them in the bottom of her locker, walking back home at the end of the day defiant but looking like the holiness girl she was supposed to be.
Mother told me plenty,  wanting to  make certain I  didnt  follow in her footsteps. I listened close, until late one night my junior year when I let a stout little running back named Bunzy sweet-talk me into going to see  a  well fire that had  erupted  when  drillers hit a  gas pocket. We left a party around eleven, me peering out the back window every few minutes, sure that every set of headlights belonged to Mother. After parking his truck in a ditch, we followed the orange glow through pastures, carrying a bottle and blanket over tree-lined fences until we got to the flame.
I snuck into the house close to sunrise and tiptoed past my step- fathers snores,  and only after I  was tucked deep  into  my  bed  did  I smile to myself, excited at the new life that awaited me outside Mothers hypocritical rules. The next morning, I discovered a hickey the running back had left, like a badge. He told everyone except his girlfriend that he got further than he did.
You could say I got the last laughhe turned into a meth-head, still in and out of jail. Mother always swore it was him who broke into the house and stole the change bucket. I was long gone by then, of course. Cause and effect, my husband says, and inches the car forward.
XIX
Two rangers lean against their Mustangs at the front of the line. Just beyond them sit two women  atop  paint horses holding purple f lags emblazoned with a golden cross and sword. The horses shift and stomp. Flags pop in the wind. Would you look at that, my hus- band says. They wear cowboy boots and white tunics gathered at the waist. Wide leather belts and giant gem-encrusted cross buckles hold their swords in leather scabbards. I hope theyve got Gold Bond in Bonita, my husband says, but he doesnt laugh. I raise my hand toward them, but they dont seem to see. Over the wind you


can hear the thrust of the gas-driven f lames from the well f ire. The women stare beyond us out toward the western horizon in certainty. One dismounts and kneels in prayer, her voice lost to the wind and f lames.
XX
The rangers let us pass after we explain our purpose, sign a dos- sier, and complete a  few forms. They assure my  husband that the  f ire will burn itself out and that theres no reason to call 911. Don Henleys been running through my head since Moab, and as the Ranger waves us past, I sing, You can check out any time you want, but you can never leave. Not funny, my husband says, and acceler- ates past the snaking f lames that dance high into the sky welcoming me home.
XXI
On the stretch into town a hand-painted sign warns, Welcome to Pretty. Slow downrough going. My husband says  the road  could be buckled from the heat, but I think earthquake. You can see where the earth bucked and bowed, picking up the two-lane road and set- ting it several feet off to the side, leaving the double yellow stripe misaligned. Infinity broken. What was a major geo-seismic event is now simply a few bumps that our steel-belted radials take with ease, nothing to it.
XXII
While we were busy packing tent stakes and books, it never occurred to us to bring more than road food. The stupidity strikes us at the same time when we see the beat-up grocery store in the middle of town, which is really just the middle of a highway. There never was much to Bonita, especially before the casino. A few gas stations. The VFW and Legion Hall. Two drugstores. One or two grocery stores, depending on the year. Plenty of churches and a rodeo arena. After the heathens voted the town wet, there was never a shortage of liquor stores, and the sign for one is half lit just down the road. That will  be the next stop.


The gas station across the street is nothing but charred rubble and bits of metal that skitter in the wind. Gas lines ruptured in the last earthquake, and dust coats the cars in the grocery store lot. A boy who cant be more than ten stands in the back of a pickup holding     a shotgun. His little brother is yanking on a kid goats ear. Not that unusual, I say to my husband whos gone quiet. When I open the car door, my husband stays put. Shes not going to leave, he says. I nod at the boy with the gun, but he just shifts feet and stares at me. I cant believe we didnt bring bacon, I say.
The checkout lady recognizes me, though to me she is only a face. She tells us that a few other places have reopened but theyll rob you blind if you dont watch. Tell your mother we miss her at the V, she says. No sense moping around waiting on the big one. She smiles, and her teeth are stained from coffee or cigarettes, both likely. Her eyes are lined in dark blue, and you can see where the powder has settled into the wrinkles crisscrossing her face. She doesnt smooth her rouge, just leaves the circles be, like setting suns.
XXIII
When we pull up to Mothers, the place looks empty without her usual array of petunias and marigolds. A blue tarp still covers the roof on the east end.  Its  buttoned  down  tight  with  bungees  in all directions, looks professional. Her horses run up to the fence and nicker, toss their heads at  us. Theyre skinny. Mothers  told  me grains hard to get and shes down to her last few round bales, but its still hard to see them looking like the horses kept by people who arent horse peoplepeople who stake a horse to a lead in the backyard and cram three kids on the bony animal to ride through the streets unshod during parades. I wonder what those horses look like now. I wonder what those kids look like.
XXIV
Mother walks out and stops, as if we are a vision she cant trust. Standing there on her cracked concrete porch with sagging steps, arms crossed, she seems small. The bonnet covers her eyes. Then she bounds down the steps and grabs me up and feels again as whole


and big as the world. My husband stands back watching us. When we dont let go or stop our crying, he begins to  unload  camping gear. Bless you babies, Mother says, stroking my hair, Bless my sweet babies. Those are my grandmothers words, not Mothers. I pretend not to notice and hold on tight.
XXV
I dont know my father, but I have my mothers hands. Our left lateral incisors each stick out just a hair. When Ive drunk too much, my husband reminds me that I have more than her hands and mouth.
XXVI
The wind knocks out the electricity at night. The tarps covering the unrepaired portion of the roof rumble across the ceiling with each gust. Mothers heeler burrows beneath a pile of quilts stacked in the corner. Mother doesnt seem fazed even though its her night on the grid. She goes around muttering prayers and lighting candles. When shes not squeezing my hands and stroking my hair, its almost like shes not even here. My husband fills the lantern I brought. I ask him if hed like to play Frisbee with his laptop.
XXVII
It turns out the end of the world has been subsidized. We must, how- ever, convince Mother to accept the food FEMA ships in. God will provide, she says. Its for us sinners, we say, and she gets a worried look, grows quiet.
When we pull up to the Tuesday pickup, my husband says in a big, booming voice, BEHOLD GOD FEMA. Great, I say, on the seventh day God created formaldehyde trailers. He says the end of the world is making us dumb and walks away to grab a box. Im happy hes making jokes, and when he comes back Im grinning. Hey look, two-by-two, I say, dropping cans of tuna and  chicken into the box.
Why would a f ish need an ark, he  says. What good is an ark to  a f ish?


XXVIII
Time moves slowly at the end of the world. Each day Mother cooks a breakfast to end all, but wont eat. Shes in there cracking store-bought eggs before we wake up. When we shuffle into the kitchen, she shakes her head at the pale yolks in apology. The hens have stopped laying her prized multicolored eggs with the hard shells and yolks like setting suns. With a set jaw, she flips the sizzling sausage that we splurged on when there was no bacon, plates the biscuits and the FEMA milk gravy, and sets it out on the counter. When we finally sit down to eat, my husband and I exchange looks as Mother blesses the food and the day and gives thanks for everything from the table and chairs to the hairs on our heads. She only smiles standing over us while we eat. We do our best to keep eating.
Mother spends the rest of the day in her room. When Im not recovering from breakfast, I drive my husband crazy with my ency- clopedic store of Don Henley songs. I dont know how I know so many or how to stop singing. He retreats to the garage to read. Or stares at the blue roof, his face smashed in concentration, muttering numbers and supply lists. I can see he feels bad that hes not a son-in- law who can swoop in with a hammer and make things right again. Sometimes I see him standing next to the barbed-wire fence trying to work up the courage to climb over and pet the horses.
I go to the bedroom to lie down beside Mother while she  reads the Bible. Sometimes I stand on the bed and sing all she wants to do is dance. I remind her of her disco days and toss my hair like a stripper. I find her box of sequins and play dress-up. She doesnt get angry. She smiles and reaches out to pull my hand to her mouth where she breathes it warm and kisses it. We have to be ready, she says.
XXIX
On Day Four, my husband comes into the kitchen and plops down     a grocery sack of toilet paper, pulls out a packet of powdered eggs. Fresh out of the real ones, he says. He starts to say something, then trails off, smoothing the edge of the fake eggs as if what he wants to say can be found there and coaxed out.


People were talking about cattle dying, he says finally. The guy hauled them to a sale because he didnt have any grass or water left on his property. When he let them out, they trampled each other trying to get to the water. Within minutes, they all collapsed. Water intoxication. And if that isnt bad enough, he says, the bag boy says theres a sex room at the VFW.
I squeeze the toilet paper to my chest like an idiot and sing: Weve been poisoned by these fairytales. It works because he hops onto the counter, and sighs, All right, which song? I shrug my shoulders and dance a little more. Then he surprises me and says that maybe we should just go to the V and have a drink.
Eyes Wide Shut II: Apocalyptic Cowboys and Hellbent Barmaids? No thanks, I say. Do you remember the lady at the grocery store?  Do you really want to see her naked? He rubs his eyes, says things may be getting to him, says I need to think about what I want to do. Then he picks up a leftover biscuit and walks into the garage. The weather has been calm for two days, the skies blue. Its making us all a little crazy.
XXX
Before all of this, my husband loved that Mother wasnt like his f irst mother-in-law, following him around tallying up his shortcomings, holding secret court with her daughter over the telephone.  While he feared what harsh truth might come out of Mothers mouth, especially when she was onto her second red eye, he loved that she was a let-it-loose kind of lady who wore too much eye shadow and did her lipstick every hour on the hour. Sometimes he walks back to her bedroom and stands in the doorway awhile before he turns and walks back out. I think hes starting to worry about that with which he cannot reason.
XXXI
I approach Mother with half a plan. She is lying on her bed with her hands clasped, Bible open beside her. The wind has picked up. You can hear it whistling through the small spaces and moaning through everything else. Out the window I see a dust devil moving across the pasture. The horses are running. A large limb cracks in the tree that


stands bare in the front yard. I watch, waiting for it to fall. When it doesnt, I sit on the bed. Lets take a drive, I begin. I tell her we need to fill up the car. The corrugate gate is banging against a fence post, ringing out again and again. God wouldnt want you in here hiding behind prayer, I say, pushing.
The birds are all gone, she says. I tried feeding them, but the little things blew off. Tumbled away one after another when they gath- ered for the seed. I guess I shouldnt have. The ones didnt catch on the fence rolled right across the pasture. Havent seen a bird in two months or more.
I look out the window for a sign of  something okay, something not terrifying. A yellow grasshopper thunks onto the screen. Mother begins to massage the top of one thumb with the other. What if youre right, I tell her. What if Gods decided, Well, so much for Earth and all those little people down there. And you know, I think Ill stretch it out, make them suffer good. If this is all weve got, then what? I want to hear you laugh. I want to hear you say, throw dirt on it, and give the finger to anybody who doesnt like it. I need you to fight. I need you. She doesnt say anything, but her eyes fill with water. I pull her hands apart, wrap them in mine. I raise her hand to my mouth, take her index finger, and run it over my sticking-out tooth. Then I run my finger along hers, feeling the bump of imperfection. Remember when you used to come into my room when I was dead asleep and do this, I ask, leaning my forehead against hers. Looking into her eyes is looking into my own. Youd open the door, say Are you asleep, before
barging in to lay down and tell me about your night.
You needed your rest, Mother says. I start to say something but she cuts me off, says, Hell come like a thief in the night. She picks up her Bible. Well, I say, if hes a thief, hes not a very good one making all this noise.
XXXII
When I poke my head into Mothers room to tell her we are going to leave for a bit, she is sitting on the edge of her bed. Her purse is at her feet, and her head is covered in a silk scarf tied beneath her chin. She looks tiny there, and older than Ive ever imagined she could be. I wonder if shes been hiding these old lady purses and scarves beneath


her bed for years, just waiting for the right mument to become this person I see before me. She smiles thinly and hugs her purse tight against her chest. The uncertainty I see in her eyes tells me its not faith keeping her in her bedroom.
The wind has let up some, I say. Itll just be a short drive. Honey, she says, its not the wind Im scared of.
XXXIII
The suns close to setting, and as we pull out of  the  drive, the  wind blows us onto the gravel shoulder before my husband yanks  it steady. Ive left him up front alone so I can sit in the back with Mother, like the new mums I see on the road, unable to let their baby rest buckled behind their backs for a second. When she didnt f ight the seat belt like she always has, my husband gave me a look that said Weve got to get out of here as plainly as if hed written a note. I make soft cooing sounds and hear myself saying, There, there. Well be just f ine.
Remember our sunsets, I say. Remember how wed pack an ice- chest with baby beers and Dr. Pepper and go up to the hill and watch the sun go down? How itd stretch for miles, lighting up the sky blood orange and blue and everything in between? Mother looks out the window, and I imagine that she smiles.
My husband f iddles with the radio up front. He passes a fuzzy news station long enough to hear that a tornado has ripped through downtown Oklahoma City. A big one. Theyre interviewing the police chief who sounds confused. His voice catches. Its just gone, he says. I lean forward and punch it off. Theres no sound for a while except the sound of the tires on the road and the wind. Always the wind.
Finally my husband speaks up. I know Oklahomas close, and I feel for them, he says. But isnt this good news, in a sense? Its weather, just horrible weather. Science.
Mother is praying to herself. Her whispers grow louder. I find his eyes in the rearview and give him the please-shut-up look. He jerks his head over his shoulder toward Mother, says, We need to talk.
I lean my head over onto Mothers shoulder and think about a new


apocalypse unconstrained by precedent or the absurdity of town bor- ders. Words run through my head: Mother and plenty of water. Safe haven and plenty to eat. Understanding and safety for the man driv- ing us, love. I cant tell if Im begging for these things or thanking something or someone or both. As if awoken from a dream, Mother looks down on me and says, Its been forever since Ive watched the sun go down from the hill.
XXXIV
When we pull up, the well f ire still hasnt burned out. My hus- band just shakes his head, giving up on understanding anything, Im afraid. One of the Riders is leading her horse toward a  trailer at the base of  the hill. Her  head hangs, stiff from sitting on  top of a horse for God knows how many hours. The wait cant be easy on the faithful either.
Two new Rangers man the exit out of town and past the roadside park. My husband stops, and one of them sticks his head in. Got ev- erything you need, he asks. I lean forward and tell him we just want to catch the sunset. My husband doesnt protest when I say well be right back, but I know were going to have to make a move quick. I can let you go, the Ranger says, but theyre shutting down unofficial entries. The man does not put up with any kind of reasoning or logic, so my husband puts it in reverse and pulls perpendicular to the road. He  puts  the car in drive, leaves  his hand on  the gearshift. Ahead, a horse trailer pulls onto the road. The Rider raises a weary hand. Finally, my husband speaks, but I have to lean in to hear himWe could just go.
XXXV
I turn to Mother. What do you think, I say. Want to grab some things? Somewhere things are better, somewhere things can still be okay. Well visit the library, go to a restaurant. We can swing wide and see the Grand Canyon. The animals need a new round bale, Mother says. And theyll need another one after that. My husband slams the car in park, and when he sighs, I have to roll down the window to get some air.


XXXVI
Mother picks up her purse, opens the door, and steps out. You know we cant stay here forever, my husband says. I love you, and Ill help you tie her up and make her go, or Ill hold you when we leave her, but Ive had enough of whatever you want to call whats happening here.
Do you even know what youre asking me to do, I say. I hit the seatback with both hands and begin to cry. Mother is holding a crum- pled tissue to her mouth, teetering across the cattle-guard, heading toward the well. I fling the door open and say, Do what you have to do. Hes still sitting there when I look back.
When I catch up to her, shes standing at the base of the flame, close enough that when I take her hand its already warm. You cant imagine heat, she says. You have to feel it for yourself.
XXXVII
Flames dance shadows across Mothers face. Heat vapors make the world look unsteady, dreamlike. Please, I say, but this close to the flame, its roar swallows the word. The pressure comes and goes, whips in and out, a giant blowtorch below the earths surface beginning to run itself dry. An orange ball billows twenty feet or more into the sky before the flames shrink down and snake wispy in the wind. The fire makes its own wind, and I feel it moving through my clothes, pushing back stray hairs. My husband crosses the cattle-guard but stands back a ways watching us. He shrugs his shoulders and gives what smile he can. Mother offers him her hand, and he comes over and puts his arm around my waist, working to be the person I need him to be a while longer.
XXXVIII
Above us, the new Riders keep watch  on  the  hill, silhouetted  by the setting sun. They step high in their stirrups and lean forward, bracing for something we cant see. We stand there, staring into the flame until it begins to grow dark outside our circle. The wind picks up, whips the flame around, lighting up our faces. Mother pulls my


hands close, turns them over, studies them like she used to when I was a girl. Im not crazy, she says. I dont think so anyway.
I know, I try to say, but she cuts me off. To tell you the truth, she says, I dont know if its suicide or salvation. If I did, maybe I could go. But you, she says, you were always my perfect angel.
She wipes my face, leans her forehead against mine, and tells me, Im glad youre not like me in the ways that count. I hold her gaze, try my best to see past my own reflection, to see her as she is right now, as she must have been all those years ago, defiant but afraid. Space opens up, the sky goes soft, and I know she wont be in the   car when we drive away.  I see whats before us, I see whats been,  and I see out past the sun where stars explode and life starts anew. When Ive seen more than I can take, I give in, close my eyes, feel  the warmth of her skin. I imagine her as big and whole as the world, pretend her words were lost to the flame.




40.
You Can Touch This!
by Jim Hanas


Steven had just finished a cigarette and lofted the butt off the loading dock when Bitsy appeared and told him there was barf in the interro- gation room. This was no surprise. There was always barf somewhere. In the interrogation room, in the supermarket, in the post office, in the dentists office. In the nail salon.
Steven arrived in the interrogation room to find a woman holding a crying child by the hand. Wherever children played and ate cake, some of them barfed. Usually the smaller ones. Steven threw a wad of paper towels down and told everyone to clear out. The name of the place was You Can Touch This! but barf was an exception. No one touched barf but Steven.
The interrogation room looked like a real interrogation room, only much shabbier. All the furniturelike most of the furniture at You Can Touch This!had been donated, in this case by the local police precinct, on the (entirely true) premise that anything grown-ups did for real, kids would enjoy pretending to do. Bitsy and her partner, Tina, had done a reasonably good job of removing the rusty metal parts from donations like theseand covering the electrical outlets and fuse boxes, and so onproviding beleaguered parents a guilt- free environment in which they could let their children roam around like wild animals. Bitsy had a marketing degree and she understood the market.


There was a table in the middle of the interrogation room sur- rounded by three aluminum chairs and a lamp that could be trained directly on the suspect. In one corner, there was a cart with wheels on it, on top of which sat a broken polygraph machine. The thin metal arms that had once recorded vital signs were bent like a tangled clot of coat hangers, but kids still loved attaching each other to it. Its surface was dappled with fruit juice and icing. The half dozen photo- copied flyers posted around the roomfeaturing a clip art image of a tankhad failed to prevent this. They said: Absolutely no food and/ or drink in the Interrogation Room.
Steven locked the door behind him. The kids could still see him, through the window and via the surveillance camera that broadcast the contents of the interrogation room on a screen outside the door. Foreheads lined the window and childrens eyes peeked just above the sill. Steven cleaning barf was suddenly much more interesting than the operating room, the telemarketing center, the broken MRI machine, or the forklift with no engine. Steven swirled his mop self- consciously until Bitsys voice came over the intercom, informing everyone that a puppet show was about to take place.
The foreheads vanished from the window, and soon Steven heard Bitsys husky voice from the other side of the warehouse in the twin roles of Fairy Godmother and Prince Charming. Steven sprayed de- odorizer in the air and closed the door behind him.
Steven decided it was a good time to go to the bathroom. He was aware how dangerous it could be to go to the bathroom at You Can Touch This! It took only one hysterical childand, as far as Steven could tell, it was the rare child who was not hystericalto report that you had touched them inappropriately, and your job and your life (as you knew it) would be over. This was what had happened to Stevens predecessorRandywhose picture now appeared on a popular government website devoted to the criminally touchy. Bitsy and Tina seemed to think that in Randys case this was deservedthat he had in fact done some touchingbut Steven thought this just proved that once one hysterical, sugar-crazed kid started talking, suspicions never really went away.
Steven did not take chances. He made it his policy never to be alone


in a closed room with anyone younger than eighteen, even though he himself was only sixteen and a virgin. Most of the time this was easy. Like the interrogation room, every room at You Can Touch  This!  had half walls or a window to prevent just this kind of secrecy. The official policy was to leave the doors to the bathrooms openaccord- ing to the photocopied flyers that appeared above the mirrors and in every stallbut Steven felt this left him vulnerable. He preferred to wait until the children were trapped in the puppet theater and then go to the bathroom by himself, locking the door safely behind him. He had tried other strategies, including clapping his hands while he was in the bathroomto make it clear he wasnt touching anything at allbut this made it difficult to handle his business and he was always peeing on himself.
After Steven locked the door and sat down, he f lipped open his phone. No messages. As he was f inishing up, he received a text from Tinathis is how they found him when they couldnt f ind himannouncing a juice spill in the copy room. The copy room, in this case, was the actual copy room, where Tina and Bitsy made copies of the warnings and instructions that were taped up every- wherealways in layouts involving clip art of clowns or dinosaurs or tanks.
Steven unlocked and opened the bathroom door to see that a line had formed. The puppet show was short. There was a woman shep- herding five little boys, one of whom looked up at Steven with a confused look.
What are you supposed to be? he asked.
This question made sense. Bitsy and Tina not only put on the puppet shows and served pizzas to parties in the private rooms that had been constructed along one side of the warehouse, but they dressed up too, based on the season and occasion. They dressed up like princesses and queens and witches and lady golfers and whatever was required, really.
But Steven was not wearing a costume. Steven was being Steven (or so Steven thought), with his blue hair and his black fingernails and his pierced nose with a chain that ran to a clip that gripped the rim of his right ear. They had agreed on an answer to this question,


however, which he was to provide whenever kids asked what he was supposed to be. That way, Bitsy said, he would fit right in.
A zombie, he said, brushing the hair out of his eyes and smiling vaguely. The boylike the woman and her other chargesseemed satisfied.
In the copy room, it was Tina who had spilled her juice, laced as   it always was with Southern Comfort. The paper was jammed and Tina was stabbing at the Copy button, producing a steady stream of useless beeps. Steven rolled his eyes and told Tina to step aside. In some ways, Bitsy and Tina were as hopeless and irritating as his own mother, except that they werent ashamed of him and they gave him someplace to stay.
He carefully dried the buttons with a series of paper towels and opened up the machines various hatches to relieve the jams before running off a dozen copies of a page with a dinosaur on it that warned of a $10 fee for cleaning up of accidents.  He  wasnt quite sure what Tina was after, but he f igured she meant the barf in the interrogation room and he wondered who would get the ten dollars.
He taped the flyers up in the interrogation room, in the supermar- ket, in the post office, in the dentists office,  in the nail salon, and in the pond of rubber balls, which was basically impossible to clean when barfed in. He then took his spot at the cash register. The last  of the days parties were getting ready to leave, but theyd first have to clear the gauntlet of goodies Bitsy and Tina had amassed by the exit in an attempt to generate incremental income. (Bitsy understood the market.) These items ranged from the arguably educational (balsa wood models of triceratopses), to the frivolous (candy jewelry), to the ethically questionable (toy soldiers painted in desert tones). Never- theless, the area where they were sold was impossible to avoid. Bitsy had turned it into a sort of corral through which all traffic had to filter. On the way into You Can Touch This!, children flew through without distraction, hypnotized by the promise of fake teleconferenc- ing centers and cupcakes with blue frosting. By the time they were leaving, however, their ability to resist was compromised by sugar and fatigue and that terrible childhood sense that the best day of your life


is coming to an end and cant it please, please, please last just a little bit longer?
Parents huddled outside the enclosure, hoping to hustle their chil- dren through quickly enough to avoid delays, whining, and discre- tionary spending. Some succeeded, but many did not, and Steven waited at the register for negotiations to wind down in screams and tears and final, desperate purchases. Once the last child had extorted the last candy cocktail ring, the silence inside the echoing expanse of You Can Touch This! practically rang.
Holy fuck! Bitsy groaned like a bear while she stretched her back. I thought theyd never leave.
She said this every night and Tina, tipsy, always laughed. With the kids gone, they all smoked cigarettes while Tina tallied the days receipts and prepared to close for the night.
Need a ride somewhere, Stevie? Bitsy asked. Want to catch a movie?
He rolled his eyes and shook his head. He thought he might die of embarrassment, even though no one was around.
Too cool to be seen with a couple old lesbos? Bitsy said, grab- bing the much smaller Tina around the waist and poking her face over her shoulder, like they were posing for a picture.
Ill just stay here, he said.
Suit yourself, Champ, Bitsy said as she and Tina left the mer- chandise corral and headed out the front door. Catch you in the morning.
Steven checked the lock on the steel door by the loading dock, shut off the industrial lights that hung far overhead, and settled into the Holiday Inn Express Child-Friendly Accommodation. The bad part about the Holiday Inn Express Child-Friendly Accommo- dation was that it had to be referred to by its full name. Holiday Inn Express had donated it to You Can Touch This! on this condition. The good part about it was that it was an exact replica of an actual Holiday Inn Express Child-Friendly Accommodation, which meant that Steven had a hotel room where he could stay for as long as he wanted. Thats why Bitsy and Tina had been able to take him in when his mother had thrown him out for being, as she said, a total


queer-bait. The only other slightly bad part was that children played, and fought, and peed, and jumped on the bed all day in the donated Holiday Inn Express Child-Friendly Accommodation, so it was a mess and it smelled like milk. Steven didnt mind too much. The television worked and if you kept the lights off, you couldnt see the fingerprints all over the screen.
He shook the bedspread to rid it of giant plastic toys and crumbs, then carefully smoothed it out on top of the bed and propped him- self against the headboard. The remote control was nailed down, but hed gotten good at operating it without looking. As he surfed for horror movies, his phone buzzed in his pocket. He pulled it out and slid it  open to  see a  text from his father. Call your mother,   it said.
Steven tossed the phone on the bed  and zoned  out  to  an airing of Near Dark hed been lucky enough to find. He was startled when he heard the door by the loading dock rattle. The warehouse was creepy at night, but Steven liked its stray creaks and its weird hollow- ness. Who knew what could be lurking where? It was his milieu. This noise was not mysterious, however. It was someone trying to get in. His father, or his mother maybe, with the police. He turned off the television. He got up and slowly crept out of the Holiday Inn Express Child-Friendly Accommodation and to the power box to turn the overhead lights back on.
Almost as soon as he threw the switch, which made a big sizzling click like something in Dr. Frankensteins lab, he heard a shriek by the loading dock. He ran across the warehouse as fast as he could, slipping on the smoothed concrete floors in his socks, to reach the room just beyond the dentists office. But the banging and shrieking was not coming from the outside. Right by the door was a little boy, crying and thrashing at the door with his fists.
Steven froze. Images of Randys image on that government website flashed before his eyes, and thisthis was so much worse. Here was a child who could not be more hysterical, in a situation where they could not be more alone. In a warehouse? It was like a joke. Steven searched his mind and couldnt discover a single reason why this was not, in some sense, a kidnapping.


The child didnt notice Steven. He just kept pounding and crying. He was maybe f ive, although Steven had trouble distin- guishing ages from four to fourteen. He was blond, and pale, and had a round face that was now as red as a tomato from crying. Steven worried that the zombie explanation wouldnt go far this time, but he had no choice, so he approached carefully and leaned down toward the boy.
Can I help you? he said. He knew this was ridiculous, but the kid turned and looked at him full face, blubbering, and fell into his arms. Steven cradled him awkwardlyhe would have preferred to handle barfand tried to calm the kid down. He reached for his phone and realized hed left it in the Holiday Inn Express Child- Friendly Accommodation.
Its all right, he was saying. Its all right.
Steven could not remember the last time he thought anything was all right.
All right, he said. Calm  down.  Whats  your  name? He was careful not to scratch the boy with his nose chain. Ashton, the boy said.
Action? Steven clarified.
Ashton! the boy said, impetuously, rubbing one of his wet eyes with the heel of his hand.
Okay, Ashton, were just going to get my phone so we can find your parents. Can we do that?
Ashton nodded limply.
Steven stood up and took Ashton by the hand and led him through the dentists office, the supermarket, and the post office to the Holi- day Inn Express Child-Friendly Accommodation. His phone was where he had left it. He picked it up andwithout letting go of Ash- tons handdialed Bitsys number.
Bitsy, Bitsy, he cried when she answered, relieved to be freed of total responsibility. Theres a kid named Ashton . . . Ashton, whats your full name?
Ashton Jacob Hunter.
Ashton Jacob Hunter, and he got locked in, and hes here right now, and weve got to find his parents, and youve got to come right away.


Son of a bitch, Bitsy bellowed into the phone. Well be right there.
Steven sat on the bed and looked at Ashton, who was just standing there, staring at him. Help was on the way.
Im hungry, Ashton said. I need to go to the bathroom.
The bathroom. The word was like a knife in Stevens heart. Here they were, already so far past his well-considered comfort zone, and now the bathroom?
There it is, Steven said, pointing to the fully-functioning bath- room in the Holiday Inn Express Child-Friendly Accommodation.
I need help, Ashton said.
Help? Are you sure you cant hold it?
I need to go! Ashton said. Steven, aided by more images of Ran- dys image on that government website, quickly calculated whether it would be better to have a happy, satisfied Ashton when help arrived or an angry, impetuous Ashton. He plucked the child from the bed and took him into the bathroom. He got down on his knees, undid the button and zipper on Ashtons corduroys and picked Ashton up and sat him on the toilet seat. And there they were, facing each other, their noses just inches apart. A shiver of relief worked its way through Ashtons little body.
What are you supposed to be? Ashton asked. A zombie, Steven said.
Ashton pulled his pants up on his own, and Steven helped zip and button them. He took Ashton by the hand again and led him back through all the rooms and the dentists office just as Bitsy was throw- ing open the steel door from outside, along with a policeman and a frantic woman who was Ashtons mother.
Ashton, oh my God, she screamed as she ran up to him and plucked him from Stevens side. Oh my God, honey, what have they done to you?
Now lets not jump to any crazy conclusions, Bitsy said. She remembered Randy too. It was an honest mistake. Hes fine. She reached out and tousled Ashtons hair with one of her big hands.
Ashtons mother pulled the boy away from Bitsy angrily. What did this man do to you? she asked the boy.


What man? Ashton asked earnestly. What man?
Ashtons mother hustled him away from the loading dock and toward her car, the policeman right behind her. Hes not a man, Ashton sang as the woman buckled him into his car seat. Hes a zombie.
A zom-beeeeeeeee, they could hear the boy happily wailing as the car wheeled around and turned toward the exit of the industrial park. Zom-beeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeee.


Ben Greenman is a writer in Brooklyn, New York. @bengreenman
Sharon Goldner is a writer in Baltimore, Maryland.
Michael Ramberg is a writer in Minneapolis, Minnesota. grebmar.net
Catherine Lacey is a writer in Brooklyn, New York. catherinelacey.com
D. Foy is a writer in Brooklyn, New York. dfoyble.com
Adam Wilson is a writer in Brooklyn, New York. adamzwilson.com Karon Luddy is a writer in Charlotte, North Carolina. @franceskaron Adetokunbo Abiola is a writer in Akure, Nigeria.
adetokunboabiola.blogspot.com
Blake Butler is a writer in Atlanta, Georgia. @blakebutler
Eliezra Schaffzin is a writer in Cambridge, Massachusetts. eliezraschaffzin.com
Jess Walter is a writer in Spokane, Washington. jesswalter.com
Mesha Maren is a writer in Asheville, North Carolina. meshamaren.blogspot.com
Paula Younger is a writer in Denver, Colorado. facebook.com/paula.younger1
Alexander Lumans is a writer in Boulder, Colorado. @ oldmanlumans Laura Jane Faulds is a writer in Toronto, Ontario. @laurajanenever Brady Hammes is a writer in Los Angeles, California.
bradyhammes.com
Lindsay Hunter is a writer in Chicago, Illinois. lindsayhunter.com
Kyle Minor is a writer in Toledo, Ohio. kyleminor.com
Daniel Browne is a writer in Brooklyn, New York. daniel-browne.tumblr.com
Brandon Hobson is a writer in Stillwater, Oklahoma. @bwhobson
Scott McClanahan is a writer in Beckley, West Virginia. hollerpresents.com
Mitchell S. Jackson is a writer in New York, New York. mitchellsjackson.com
O. A. Lindsey is a writer in Austin, Texas. oalindsey4@gmail.com
Nathan Oates is a writer in Brooklyn, New York. oatesnathan.wordpress.com


Alan Rossi is a writer in Spartanburg, South Carolina. stories-like-stories-you-know.blogspot.com
Elizabeth Crane is a writer in Austin, Texas. elizabethcrane.com
David Williams is a writer in Cordova, Tennessee. davidwwilliams.blogspot.com
Roxane Gay is a writer in Charleston, Illinois. @ rgay
Matt Stewart is a writer in San Francisco, California. matt-stewart.com David Backer is a writer in New York, New York. fictiondaily.org Matthew Norman is a writer in Baltimore, Maryland.
thenormannation.com
Eric Raymond is a writer in San Francisco, California. @ pontiuslabar
Shane Jones is a writer in Albany, New York. @hishanejones
Tessa Mellas is a writer in Cincinnati, Ohio. tessamellas.weebly.com
Jamie Quatro is a writer in Lookout Mountain, Georgia. jamiequatro.com
Kayden Kross is a writer in Los Angeles, California. unkrossed.com [NSFW!]
Joseph Scapellato is a writer in Lewisburg, Pennsylvania. josephscapellato.wordpress.com
Greg Bardsley is a writer in San Carlos, California. gregbardsley.com
Kelli Ford is a writer in Boise, Idaho. kellijoford.blogspot.com
Jim Hanas is a writer in New York, New York. jimhanas.com




CHAPTER I.

T
o Sherlock Holmes she is always the woman. I have seldom heard him men- tion her under any other name. In his eyes she eclipses and predominates the
whole of her sex. It was not that he felt any emo- tion akin to love for Irene Adler. All emotions, and that one particularly, were abhorrent to his cold, precise but admirably balanced mind. He was, I take it, the most perfect reasoning and observing machine that the world has seen, but as a lover he would have placed himself in a false position. He never spoke of the softer passions, save with a gibe and a sneer. They were admirable things for the ob- serverexcellent for drawing the veil from mens motives and actions. But for the trained reasoner to admit such intrusions into his own delicate and finely adjusted temperament was to introduce a dis- tracting factor which might throw a doubt upon all his mental results. Grit in a sensitive instrument, or a crack in one of his own high-power lenses, would not be more disturbing than a strong emotion in    a nature such as his. And yet there was but one woman to him, and that woman was the late Irene Adler, of dubious and questionable memory.
I had seen little of Holmes lately. My marriage had drifted us away from each other. My own complete happiness, and the home-centred inter- ests which rise up around the man who first finds himself master of his own establishment, were suf- ficient to absorb all my attention, while Holmes, who loathed every form of society with his whole Bohemian soul, remained in our lodgings in Baker Street, buried among his old books, and alternating from week to week between cocaine and ambition, the drowsiness of the drug, and the fierce energy of his own keen nature. He was still, as ever, deeply attracted by the study of crime, and occupied his immense faculties and extraordinary powers of ob- servation in following out those clues, and clearing up those mysteries which had been abandoned as hopeless by  the official police.  From time to time  I heard some vague account of his doings: of his summons to Odessa in the case of the Trepoff mur- der, of his clearing up of the singular tragedy of  the Atkinson brothers at Trincomalee, and finally of the mission which he had accomplished so del- icately and successfully for the reigning family of Holland. Beyond these signs of his activity, how- ever, which I merely shared with all the readers of the daily press, I knew little of my former friend and companion.
One nightit was on the twentieth of March,
1888I was  returning from a journey to a  patient
(for I had now returned to civil  practice),  when my way led me through Baker Street. As I passed the well-remembered door, which must always be associated in my mind with my wooing, and with the dark incidents of the Study in Scarlet, I was seized with a keen desire to see Holmes again, and to know how he was employing his extraordinary powers. His rooms were brilliantly lit, and, even as I looked up, I saw his tall, spare figure pass twice in a dark silhouette against the blind. He was pacing the room swiftly, eagerly, with his head sunk upon his chest and his hands clasped behind him. To me, who knew his every mood and habit, his attitude and manner told their own story. He was at work again. He had risen out of his drug-created dreams and was hot upon the scent of some new problem.  I rang the bell and was shown up to the chamber which had formerly been in part my own.
His manner was not effusive. It seldom was; but he was glad, I think, to see me. With hardly a word spoken, but with a kindly eye, he waved  me  to an armchair, threw across his case of cigars, and indicated a spirit case and a gasogene in the corner. Then he stood before the fire and looked me over in his singular introspective fashion.
Wedlock suits you, he remarked. I think, Watson, that you have put on seven and a half pounds since I saw you.
Seven! I answered.
Indeed, I should have thought a little more. Just a trifle more, I fancy, Watson. And in prac-  tice again, I observe. You did not tell me that you intended to go into harness.
Then, how do you know?
I see it, I deduce it. How do I know that you have been getting yourself very wet lately, and that you have a most clumsy and careless servant girl?
My dear Holmes, said I, this is too much. You would certainly have been burned, had you lived a few centuries ago. It is true that I had a country walk on Thursday and came home in a dreadful mess,  but as I have  changed my clothes   I cant imagine how you deduce it. As to  Mary Jane, she is incorrigible, and my wife has given her notice, but there, again, I fail to see how you work it out.
He chuckled to himself and rubbed his long, nervous hands together.
It is simplicity itself, said he; my eyes tell me that on the inside of your left shoe, just where the firelight strikes it, the leather is scored by six almost parallel cuts. Obviously they have been caused by



someone who has very carelessly scraped round the edges of the sole in order to remove crusted mud from it. Hence, you see, my double deduction that you had been out in vile weather, and that you had a particularly malignant boot-slitting specimen of the London slavey. As to your practice, if a gen- tleman walks into my rooms smelling of iodoform, with a black mark of nitrate of silver upon his right forefinger, and a bulge on the right side of his top- hat to show where he has secreted his stethoscope, I must be dull, indeed, if I do not pronounce him  to be an active member of the medical profession.
I could not help laughing at the ease with which he explained his process of deduction. When I hear you give your reasons, I remarked, the thing always appears to me to be so ridiculously simple that I could easily do it myself, though at each successive instance of your reasoning I am baffled until you explain your process. And yet I believe that my eyes are as good as yours.
Quite so, he answered, lighting a cigarette, and throwing himself down into an armchair. You see, but you do not observe. The distinction is clear. For example, you have frequently seen the steps which lead up from the hall to this room.
Frequently. How often?
Well, some hundreds of times. Then how many are there? How many? I dont know.
Quite so! You have not observed. And yet you have seen. That is just my point. Now, I know that there are seventeen steps, because I have both seen and observed. By-the-way, since you are interested in these little problems, and since you are good enough to chronicle one or two of my trifling expe- riences, you may be interested in this. He threw over a sheet of thick, pink-tinted note-paper which had been lying open upon the table. It came by the last post, said he. Read it aloud.
The note was undated, and without either sig- nature or address.
There will call upon you to-night, at a quarter to eight oclock, it said, a gentleman who desires to consult you upon a matter of the very deepest moment. Your recent services to one of the royal houses of Europe have shown that you are one who may safely be trusted with matters which are of an importance which can hardly be exaggerated. This account of you we have from all quarters received. Be in your chamber then at that hour, and do not take it amiss if your visitor wear a mask.
This is indeed a mystery, I remarked. What do you imagine that it means?
I have no data yet. It is a capital mistake to theorize before one has data. Insensibly one begins to twist facts to suit theories, instead of theories to suit facts. But the note itself. What do you deduce from it?
I carefully examined the writing, and the paper upon which it was written.
The man who wrote it was presumably well to do, I remarked, endeavouring to imitate my companions processes. Such paper could not be bought under half a crown a packet. It is peculiarly strong and stiff.
Peculiarthat is the very word, said Holmes. It is not an English paper at all. Hold it up to the light.
I did so, and saw a large E with a small g, a P, and a large G with a small t woven into the texture of the paper.
What do you make of that? asked Holmes. The name of the maker, no doubt; or his mono-
gram, rather.
Not at all. The G with the small t stands for Gesellschaft, which is the German for Company. It is a customary contraction like our Co. P, of course, stands for Papier. Now for the Eg. Let us glance at our Continental Gazetteer. He took down a heavy brown volume from his shelves. Eglow, Eglonitzhere we are, Egria. It is in a German- speaking countryin Bohemia, not far from Carls- bad. Remarkable as being the scene of the death  of Wallenstein, and for its numerous glass-factories and paper-mills. Ha, ha, my boy, what do  you make of that? His eyes sparkled, and he sent up a great blue triumphant cloud from his cigarette.
The paper was made in Bohemia, I said. Precisely. And the man who wrote the note is
a German. Do you note the peculiar construction of
the sentenceThis account of you we have from all quarters received. A Frenchman or Russian could not have written that. It is the German who is so uncourteous to his verbs. It only remains, therefore, to discover what is wanted by this German who writes upon Bohemian paper and prefers wearing a mask to showing his face. And here he comes, if  I am not mistaken, to resolve all our doubts.
As he spoke there was the sharp sound of horses hoofs and grating wheels against the curb, followed by a sharp pull at the bell. Holmes whis- tled.
A pair, by the sound, said he. Yes, he con- tinued, glancing out of the window. A nice little brougham and a pair of beauties. A hundred and



fifty guineas apiece. Theres money in this case, Watson, if there is nothing else.
I think that I had better go,  Holmes.
Not a bit, Doctor. Stay where you are. I am  lost without my Boswell. And this promises to be interesting. It would be a pity to miss it.
But your client
Never mind him. I may want your help, and so may he. Here he comes. Sit down in that armchair, Doctor, and give us your best attention.
A slow and heavy step, which had been heard upon the stairs and in the passage, paused immedi- ately outside the door. Then there was a loud and authoritative tap.
Come in! said Holmes.
A man entered who could hardly have been less than six feet six inches in height, with the chest and limbs of a Hercules. His dress was rich with a rich- ness which would, in England, be looked upon as akin to bad taste. Heavy bands of astrakhan were slashed across the sleeves and fronts of his double- breasted coat, while the deep blue cloak which was thrown over his shoulders was lined with flame- coloured silk and secured at the neck with a brooch which consisted of a single flaming beryl. Boots which extended halfway up his calves, and which were trimmed at the tops with rich brown fur, com- pleted the impression of barbaric opulence which was suggested by his whole appearance. He carried a broad-brimmed hat in his hand, while he wore across the upper part of his face, extending down past the cheekbones, a black vizard mask, which  he had apparently adjusted that very moment, for his hand was still raised to it as he entered. From the lower part of the face he appeared to be a man of strong character, with a thick, hanging lip, and a long, straight chin suggestive of resolution pushed to the length of obstinacy.
You had my note? he asked with a deep harsh voice and a strongly marked German accent. I told you that I would call. He looked from one to the other of us, as if uncertain which to address.
Pray take a seat, said Holmes. This is my friend and colleague, Dr. Watson, who is occasion- ally good enough to help me in my cases. Whom have I the honour to address?
You may address me as the Count Von Kramm, a Bohemian nobleman. I understand that this gen- tleman, your friend, is a man of honour and discre- tion, whom I may trust with a matter of the most extreme importance. If not, I should much prefer to communicate with you alone.
I rose to go, but Holmes caught me by the wrist and pushed me back into my chair. It is both, or none, said he. You may say before this gentleman anything which you may say to me.
The Count shrugged his broad shoulders. Then I must begin, said he, by binding you both to absolute secrecy for two years; at the  end  of that time the matter will be of no importance. At present it is not too much to say that it is of such weight it may have an influence upon European history.
I promise, said Holmes. And I.
You will excuse this mask, continued our strange visitor. The august person who employs me wishes his agent to be unknown to you, and I may confess at once that the title by which I have just called myself is not exactly my own.
I was  aware  of it, said Holmes  dryly.
The circumstances are of great delicacy, and every precaution has to be taken to quench what might grow to be an immense scandal and seriously compromise one of the reigning families of Europe. To speak plainly, the matter implicates the great House of Ormstein, hereditary kings of Bohemia.
I was also aware of that, murmured Holmes, settling himself down in his armchair and closing his eyes.
Our visitor glanced with some apparent sur- prise at the languid, lounging figure of the man who had been no doubt depicted to him as the most incisive reasoner and most energetic agent   in Europe. Holmes slowly reopened his eyes and looked impatiently at his gigantic client.
If your Majesty would condescend to state your case, he remarked, I should be better able to ad- vise you.
The man sprang from his chair and paced up and down the room in uncontrollable agitation. Then, with a gesture of desperation, he tore the mask from his face and hurled it upon the ground. You are right, he cried; I am the King. Why should I attempt to conceal it?
Why, indeed? murmured Holmes. Your Majesty had not spoken before I was  aware  that    I was addressing Wilhelm Gottsreich Sigismond von Ormstein, Grand Duke of Cassel-Felstein, and hereditary King of Bohemia.
But you can understand, said our strange vis- itor, sitting down once more and passing his hand over his high white forehead, you can understand that I am not accustomed to doing such business in my own person. Yet the matter was so delicate that I could not confide it to an agent without putting



myself in his power. I have come incognito from Prague for the purpose of consulting you.
Then, pray consult, said Holmes, shutting his eyes once more.
The facts are briefly these: Some five years ago, during a lengthy visit to Warsaw, I made the acquaintance of the well-known adventuress, Irene Adler. The name is no doubt familiar to you.
Kindly look her up in my index, Doctor, mur- mured Holmes without opening his eyes. For many years he had adopted a system of docketing all para- graphs concerning men and things, so that it was difficult to name a subject or a person on which he could not at once furnish information. In this case I found her biography sandwiched in between that of a Hebrew rabbi and that of a staff-commander who had written a monograph upon the deep-sea fishes.
Let me see! said Holmes. Hum! Born in New Jersey in the year 1858. Contraltohum! La Scala, hum! Prima donna Imperial Opera of War- sawyes! Retired from operatic stageha! Living in Londonquite so! Your Majesty, as I under- stand, became entangled with this young person, wrote her some compromising letters, and is now desirous of getting those letters back.
Precisely so. But  how Was there a secret marriage? None.
No legal papers or certificates? None.
Then I fail to follow your Majesty. If this young person should produce her letters for blackmailing or other purposes, how is she to prove their authen- ticity?
There is the writing. Pooh, pooh! Forgery. My private note-paper. Stolen.
My own seal. Imitated.
My photograph. Bought.
We were both in the photograph.
Oh, dear! That is very bad! Your Majesty has indeed committed an indiscretion.
I was madinsane.
You have compromised yourself seriously.
I was only Crown Prince then. I was young. I am but thirty now.
It must be recovered. We have tried and failed.
Your Majesty must pay. It must be bought. She will not sell.
Stolen, then.
Five attempts have been made. Twice burglars in my pay ransacked her house. Once we diverted her luggage when she travelled. Twice she has been waylaid. There has been no result.
No sign of it? Absolutely none.
Holmes laughed. It is quite a pretty little prob- lem, said he.
But a very serious one to me, returned the King reproachfully.
Very, indeed. And what does she propose to do with the photograph?
To ruin me. But how?
I am about to be married. So I have heard.
To Clotilde Lothman von Saxe-Meningen, sec- ond daughter of the King of Scandinavia. You may know the strict principles of her family. She is her- self the very soul of delicacy. A shadow of a doubt as to my conduct would bring the matter to an end.
And Irene Adler?
Threatens to send them the photograph. And she will do it. I know that she will do it. You do  not know her, but she has a soul of steel. She has the face of the most beautiful of women, and the mind of the most resolute of men. Rather than I should marry another woman, there are no lengths to which she would not gonone.
You are sure that she has not sent it yet? I am sure.
And why?
Because she has said that she would send it on the day when the betrothal was publicly pro- claimed. That will be next Monday.
Oh, then we have three days yet, said Holmes with a yawn. That is very fortunate,  as  I  have one or two matters of importance to look into just at present. Your Majesty will, of course, stay in London for the present?
Certainly. You will find me at the Langham under the name of the Count Von Kramm.
Then I shall drop you a line to let you know how we progress.



Pray do so. I shall be all anxiety. Then, as to money?
You have carte blanche. Absolutely?
I tell you that I would give one of the provinces of my kingdom to have that photograph.
And for present expenses?
The King took a heavy chamois leather bag from under his cloak and laid it on the table.
There are three hundred pounds in gold and seven hundred in notes, he said.
Holmes scribbled a receipt upon a sheet of his note-book and handed it to him.
And Mademoiselles address? he asked.
Is Briony Lodge, Serpentine Avenue, St. Johns Wood.
Holmes took a note of it. One other question, said he. Was the photograph a cabinet?
It was.
Then, good-night, your Majesty, and I trust that we shall soon have some good news for you. And good-night, Watson, he added, as the wheels of the royal brougham rolled down the street. If you will be good enough to call to-morrow after- noon at three oclock I should like to chat this little matter over with you.








CHAPTER II.


At three oclock precisely I was at Baker Street, but Holmes had not yet returned. The landlady in- formed me that he had left the house shortly after eight oclock in the morning. I sat down beside the fire, however, with the intention of awaiting him, however long he might be. I was already deeply interested in his inquiry, for, though it was sur- rounded by none of the grim and strange features which were associated with the two crimes which I have already recorded, still, the nature of the case and the exalted station of his client gave it a charac- ter of its own. Indeed, apart from the nature of the investigation which my friend had on hand, there was something in his masterly grasp of a situation, and his keen, incisive reasoning, which made it a pleasure to me to study his system of work,  and   to follow the quick, subtle methods by which he disentangled the most inextricable mysteries. So accustomed was I to his invariable success that the very possibility of his failing had ceased to enter into my head.

It was close upon four before the door opened, and a drunken-looking groom, ill-kempt and side- whiskered, with an inflamed face and disreputable clothes, walked into the room. Accustomed as I was to my friends amazing powers in the use of disguises, I had to look three times before I was certain that it was indeed he. With a nod he van- ished into the bedroom, whence he emerged in five minutes tweed-suited and respectable, as of old.
Putting his hands into his pockets, he stretched out his legs in front of the fire and laughed heartily for some minutes.
Well, really! he cried, and then he choked and laughed again until he was obliged to lie back, limp and helpless, in the chair.
What is it?
Its quite too funny. I am sure you could never guess how I employed my morning, or what I ended by doing.
I cant imagine. I suppose that you have been watching the habits, and perhaps the house, of Miss Irene Adler.
Quite so; but the sequel was rather unusual. I will tell you,  however.  I left the house a little af-  ter eight oclock this morning in the character of a groom out of work. There is a wonderful sympathy and freemasonry among horsey men. Be one of them, and you will know all that there is to know. I soon found Briony Lodge. It is a bijou villa, with a garden at the back, but built out in front right up to the road, two stories. Chubb lock to the door. Large sitting-room on the right side, well furnished, with long windows almost to the floor, and those pre- posterous English window fasteners which a child could open. Behind there was nothing remarkable, save that the passage window could be reached from the top of the coach-house. I walked round it and examined it closely from every point of view, but without noting anything else of interest.



I then lounged down the street and found, as   I expected, that there was a mews in a lane which runs down by one wall of the garden. I lent the ostlers a hand in rubbing down their horses, and received in exchange twopence, a glass of half and half, two fills of shag tobacco, and as much infor- mation as I could desire about Miss Adler, to say nothing of half a dozen other people in the neigh- bourhood in whom I was not in the least interested, but whose biographies I was compelled to listen to.
And what of Irene Adler? I asked.
Oh, she has turned all the mens heads down in that part. She is the daintiest thing under a bon- net on this planet. So say the Serpentine-mews, to a man. She lives quietly, sings at concerts, drives out at five every day, and returns at seven  sharp  for dinner. Seldom goes out at other times, except when she  sings.  Has  only  one  male  visitor,  but a good deal of him. He is dark, handsome, and dashing, never calls less than once a day, and often twice. He is a Mr. Godfrey Norton, of the Inner Temple. See the advantages of a cabman as a con- fidant. They had driven him home a dozen times from Serpentine-mews, and knew all about him. When I had listened to all they had to tell, I began to walk up and down near Briony Lodge once more, and to think over my plan of campaign.
This Godfrey Norton was evidently an impor- tant factor in the matter. He was a lawyer. That sounded ominous. What was the relation between them, and what the object of his repeated visits? Was she his client, his friend, or his mistress? If  the former, she had probably transferred the photo- graph to his keeping. If the latter, it was less likely. On the issue of this question depended whether I should continue my work at Briony Lodge, or turn my attention to the gentlemans chambers in the Temple. It was a delicate point, and it widened the field of my inquiry. I fear that I bore you with these details, but I have to let you see my little difficulties, if you are to understand the situation.
I am following you closely, I answered.
I was still balancing the matter in my mind when a hansom cab drove up to Briony Lodge, and a gentleman sprang out. He was a remark- ably handsome man, dark, aquiline, and mous- tachedevidently the man of whom I had heard. He appeared to be in a great hurry, shouted to the cabman to wait, and brushed past the maid who opened the door with the air of a man who was thoroughly at home.
He was in the house about half an hour, and I could catch glimpses of him in the windows of
the sitting-room, pacing up and down, talking ex- citedly, and waving his arms. Of her I could see nothing. Presently he emerged, looking even more flurried than before. As he stepped up to the cab, he pulled a gold watch from his pocket and looked at it earnestly, Drive like the devil, he shouted, first to Gross & Hankeys in Regent Street, and then to the Church of St. Monica in the Edgeware Road. Half a guinea if you do it in twenty minutes!
Away they went, and I was just wondering whether I should not do well to follow them when up the lane came a neat little landau, the coachman with his coat only half-buttoned, and his tie under his ear, while all the tags of his harness were stick- ing out of the buckles. It hadnt pulled up before she shot out of the hall door and into it. I only caught a glimpse of her at the moment, but she was a lovely woman, with a face that a man might die for.
 The Church of St. Monica, John, she cried, and half a sovereign if you reach it in twenty min- utes.
This was quite too good to  lose,  Watson.  I was just balancing whether I should run for it, or whether I should perch behind her landau when    a cab came through the street. The driver looked twice at such a shabby fare, but I jumped in before he could object.  The Church of St. Monica,  said  I, and half a sovereign if you reach it in twenty minutes. It was twenty-five minutes to twelve, and of course it was clear enough what was in the wind.
My cabby drove fast. I dont think I ever drove faster, but the others were there before us. The cab and the landau with their steaming horses were in front of the door when I arrived. I paid the man and hurried into the church. There was not a soul there save the two whom I had followed and a surpliced clergyman, who seemed to be expostu- lating with them.  They were  all three standing in  a knot in front of the altar. I lounged up the side aisle like any other idler who has dropped into a church. Suddenly, to my surprise, the three at the altar faced round to me, and Godfrey Norton came running as hard as he could towards me.
 Thank God, he cried. Youll do. Come!
Come!
 What then? I asked.
 Come, man, come, only three minutes, or it wont be legal.
I was half-dragged up to the altar, and be- fore I knew where I was I found myself mumbling responses which were whispered in my ear, and vouching for things of which I knew nothing, and generally assisting in the secure tying up of Irene



Adler, spinster, to Godfrey Norton, bachelor. It was all done in an instant, and there was the gentleman thanking me on the one side and the lady on the other, while the clergyman beamed on me in front. It was the most preposterous position in which I ever found myself in my life, and it was the thought of it that started me laughing just now. It seems that there had been some informality about their license, that the clergyman absolutely refused to marry them without a witness of some sort, and that my lucky appearance saved the bridegroom from having to sally out into the streets in search of a best man. The bride gave  me a sovereign, and I mean to wear it on my watch-chain in memory of the occasion.
This is a very unexpected turn of affairs, said I; and what then?
Well, I found my plans very seriously menaced. It looked as if the pair might take an immediate departure, and so necessitate very prompt and en- ergetic measures on my part. At the church door, however, they separated, he driving back to the Temple, and she to her own house. I shall drive out in the park at five  as usual,  she said as she  left him. I heard no more. They drove away in dif- ferent directions, and I went off to make my own arrangements.
Which are?
Some cold beef and a glass of beer, he an- swered, ringing the  bell.  I  have  been  too  busy to think of food, and I am likely to be busier still this evening. By the way, Doctor, I shall want your co-operation.
I shall be delighted.
You dont mind breaking the law? Not in the least.
Nor running a chance of arrest? Not in a good cause.
Oh, the cause is excellent! Then I am your man.
I was sure that I might rely on you. But what is it you wish?
When Mrs. Turner has brought in the tray I will make it clear to you. Now, he said as he turned hungrily on the simple fare that our land- lady had provided, I must discuss it while I eat, for I have not much time. It is nearly five now. In two hours we must be on the scene of action. Miss Irene, or Madame, rather, returns from her drive at seven. We must be at Briony Lodge to meet her.
And what then?
You must leave that to me. I have already ar- ranged what is to occur. There is only one point on which I must insist. You must not interfere, come what may. You understand?
I am to be neutral?
To do nothing whatever. There will probably  be some small unpleasantness.  Do not join in it.   It will end in my being conveyed into the house. Four or five minutes afterwards the sitting-room window will open. You are to station yourself close to that open window.
Yes.
You are to watch me, for I will be visible to you.
Yes.
And when I raise my handsoyou will throw into the room what I give you to throw, and will, at the same time, raise the cry of fire. You quite follow me?
Entirely.
It is nothing very formidable, he said, taking a long cigar-shaped roll from his pocket. It is an ordinary plumbers smoke-rocket, fitted with a cap at either end to make it self-lighting. Your task is confined to that. When you raise your cry of fire, it will be taken up by quite a number of people. You may then walk to the end of the street, and I will rejoin you in ten minutes. I hope that I have made myself clear?
I am to remain neutral, to get near the window, to watch you, and at the signal to throw in this object, then to raise the cry of fire, and to wait you at the corner of the street.
Precisely.
Then you may entirely rely on me.
That is excellent. I think, perhaps, it is almost time that I prepare for the new role I have to play.
He disappeared into his bedroom and returned in a few minutes in the character of an amiable  and simple-minded Nonconformist clergyman. His broad black hat, his baggy trousers, his white tie, his sympathetic smile, and general look of peering and benevolent curiosity were such as Mr. John Hare alone could have equalled. It was not merely that Holmes changed his costume. His expression, his manner, his very soul seemed to vary with ev- ery fresh part that he assumed. The stage lost a fine actor, even as science lost an acute reasoner, when he became a specialist in crime.
It was a quarter past six when we left Baker Street, and it still wanted ten minutes to the hour when we found ourselves in Serpentine Avenue. It was already dusk, and the lamps were just being



lighted as we paced up and down in front of Briony Lodge, waiting for the coming of its occupant. The house was just such as I had pictured it from Sher- lock Holmes succinct description, but the locality appeared to be less private than I expected.  On  the contrary, for a small street in a quiet neighbour- hood, it was remarkably animated. There was a group of shabbily dressed men smoking and laugh- ing in a corner, a scissors-grinder with his wheel, two guardsmen who were flirting with a nurse-  girl, and several well-dressed young men who were lounging up and down with cigars in their mouths.
You see, remarked Holmes, as we paced to and fro in front of the house, this marriage rather simplifies matters. The photograph becomes a double-edged weapon now. The chances are that she would be as averse to its being seen by Mr. Godfrey Norton, as our client is to its coming to the eyes of his princess. Now the question isWhere are we to find the photograph?
Where, indeed?
It is most unlikely that she carries it about with her. It is cabinet size. Too large for easy conceal- ment about a womans dress. She knows that the King is capable of having her waylaid and searched. Two attempts of the sort have already been made. We may take it, then, that she does not carry it about with her.
Where, then?
Her banker or her lawyer. There is that dou- ble possibility. But I am inclined to think neither. Women are naturally secretive, and they like to do their own secreting. Why should she hand it over  to anyone else? She could trust her own guardian- ship, but she could not tell what indirect or political influence might be brought to bear upon a business man. Besides, remember that she had resolved to use it within a few days.   It must be where she   can lay her hands upon it. It must be in her own house.
But it has twice been burgled.
Pshaw! They did not know how to look. But how will you look?
I will not look. What then?
I will get her to show me. But she will refuse.
She will not be able to. But I hear the rumble of wheels. It is her carriage. Now carry out my orders to the letter.
As he spoke the gleam of the side-lights of a carriage came round the curve of the avenue. It
was a smart little landau which rattled up to the door of Briony Lodge. As it pulled up, one of the loafing men at the corner dashed forward to open the door in the hope of earning a copper, but was elbowed away by another loafer, who had rushed  up with the same intention. A fierce quarrel broke out, which was increased by the two guardsmen, who took sides with one of the loungers, and by  the scissors-grinder, who was equally hot upon the other side. A blow was struck, and in an instant  the lady, who had stepped from her carriage, was the centre of a little knot of flushed and struggling men, who struck savagely at each other with their fists and sticks.  Holmes  dashed  into  the  crowd to protect the lady; but just as he reached her he gave a cry and dropped to the ground, with the blood running freely down his  face.  At  his  fall the guardsmen took to their heels in one direction and the loungers in the other, while a number of better-dressed people, who had watched the scuffle without taking part in it, crowded in to help the lady and to attend to the injured man. Irene Adler, as I will still call her, had hurried up the steps; but she stood at the top with her superb figure outlined against the lights of the hall, looking back into the street.
Is the poor gentleman much hurt? she asked. He is dead, cried several voices.
No, no, theres life in him! shouted another. But hell be gone before you can get him to hospi- tal.
Hes a brave fellow, said a woman. They would have had the ladys purse and watch if it hadnt been for him. They were a gang, and a rough one, too. Ah, hes breathing now.
He cant lie in the street. May we bring him in, marm?
Surely. Bring him into the sitting-room. There is a comfortable sofa. This way, please!
Slowly and solemnly he was borne into Briony Lodge and laid out in the principal room,  while     I still observed the proceedings from my post by the window. The lamps had been lit, but the blinds had not been drawn, so that I could see Holmes as he lay upon the couch. I do not know whether he was seized with compunction at that moment for the part he was playing, but I know that I never felt more heartily ashamed of myself in my life than when I saw the beautiful creature against whom I was conspiring, or the grace and kindliness with which she waited upon the injured man. And yet it would be the blackest treachery to Holmes to draw back now from the part which he had intrusted



to me. I hardened my heart, and took the smoke- rocket from under my ulster. After all, I thought, we are not injuring her. We are but preventing her from injuring another.
Holmes had sat up upon the couch, and I saw him motion like a man who is in need of air. A maid rushed across and threw open the window. At the same instant I saw him raise his hand and at the signal I tossed my rocket into the room with a cry of Fire! The word was no sooner out of my mouth than the whole crowd of spectators, well dressed and illgentlemen, ostlers, and servant- maidsjoined in a general shriek of Fire! Thick clouds of smoke curled through the room and out at the open window. I caught a glimpse of rushing figures, and a moment later the voice of Holmes from within assuring them that it was a false alarm. Slipping through the shouting crowd I made my way to the corner of the street, and in ten minutes was rejoiced to find my friends arm in mine, and to get away from the scene of uproar. He walked swiftly and in silence for some few minutes until we had turned down one of the quiet streets which lead towards the Edgeware Road.
You did it very nicely, Doctor, he remarked. Nothing could have been better. It is all right.
You have the photograph? I know where it is.
And how did you find out?
She showed me, as I told you she would. I am still in the dark.
I do not wish to make a mystery, said he, laughing. The matter was perfectly simple.  You,  of course, saw that everyone in the street was an ac- complice. They were all engaged for the evening.
I guessed as much.
Then, when the row broke out, I had a little moist red paint in the palm of my hand. I rushed forward, fell down, clapped my hand to my face, and became a piteous spectacle. It is an old trick.
That also I could fathom.
Then they carried me in. She was bound to have  me in.  What else could she do?  And into  her sitting-room, which was  the very room which  I suspected. It lay between that and her bedroom, and I was determined to see which. They laid me on a couch, I motioned for air, they were compelled to open the window, and you had your chance.
How did that help you?
It was all-important. When a woman thinks that her house is on fire, her instinct is at once to rush to the thing which she values most. It is a perfectly overpowering impulse, and I have more than once taken advantage of it. In the case of the Darlington substitution scandal it was of use to me, and also in the Arnsworth Castle business. A mar- ried woman grabs at her baby; an unmarried one reaches for her jewel-box. Now it was clear to me that our lady of to-day had nothing in the house more precious to her than what we are in quest of. She would rush to secure it. The alarm of fire was admirably done. The smoke and shouting were enough to shake nerves of steel. She responded beautifully.  The photograph is in a recess behind  a sliding panel just above the right bell-pull. She was there in an instant, and I caught a glimpse of  it as she half-drew it out. When I cried out that it was a false alarm, she replaced it, glanced at the rocket, rushed from the room, and I have not seen her since. I rose, and, making my excuses, escaped from the house. I hesitated whether to attempt to secure the photograph at once; but the coachman had come in, and as he was watching me narrowly it seemed safer to wait. A little over-precipitance may ruin all.
And now? I asked.
Our quest is practically finished. I shall call with the King to-morrow, and with you,  if  you care to come with us. We will be shown into the sitting-room to wait for the lady, but it is probable that when she comes she may find neither us nor the photograph. It might be a satisfaction to his Majesty to regain it with his own hands.
And when will you call?
At eight in the morning. She will not be up, so that we shall have a clear field. Besides, we  must be prompt, for this marriage may mean a complete change in her life and habits. I must wire to the King without delay.
We had reached Baker Street and had stopped at the door. He was searching his pockets for the key when someone passing said:
Good-night, Mister Sherlock Holmes.
There were several people on the pavement at the time, but the greeting appeared to come from a slim youth in an ulster who had hurried by.
Ive heard that voice before, said Holmes, star- ing down the dimly lit street. Now, I wonder who the deuce that could have been.


CHAPTER III.


I slept at Baker Street that night, and we were engaged upon our toast and coffee in the morning when the King of Bohemia rushed into the room.
You have really got it! he cried, grasping Sher- lock Holmes by either shoulder and looking eagerly into his face.
Not yet.
But you have hopes? I have hopes.
Then, come. I am all impatience to be gone. We must have a cab.
No, my brougham is waiting.
Then that will simplify matters. We de- scended and started off once more for Briony Lodge.
Irene Adler is married, remarked Holmes. Married! When?
Yesterday. But to whom?
To an English lawyer named Norton. But she could not love him.
I am in hopes that she does. And why in hopes?
Because it would spare your Majesty all fear  of future annoyance. If the lady loves her husband, she does not love your Majesty. If she does not love your Majesty, there is no reason why she should interfere with your Majestys plan.
It is true. And yetWell! I wish she had been of my own station! What a queen she would have made! He relapsed into a moody silence, which was not broken until we drew up in Serpentine Avenue.
The door of Briony Lodge was open, and an elderly woman stood upon the steps. She watched us with a sardonic eye as we stepped from the brougham.
Mr. Sherlock Holmes, I believe? said she.
I am Mr. Holmes, answered my companion, looking at her with a questioning and rather star- tled gaze.
Indeed! My mistress told me that you were likely to call. She left this morning with her hus- band by the 5.15 train from Charing Cross for the Continent.
What! Sherlock Holmes staggered back, white with chagrin and surprise. Do you mean that she has left England?
Never to return.
And the papers? asked the King hoarsely. All is lost.
We shall see. He pushed past the  servant  and rushed into the drawing-room,  followed  by the King and myself. The furniture was scattered about in every direction, with dismantled shelves and open drawers, as if the lady had hurriedly ran- sacked them before her flight. Holmes rushed at the bell-pull, tore back a small sliding shutter, and, plunging in his hand, pulled out a photograph and a letter. The photograph was of Irene Adler her-  self in evening dress, the letter was superscribed to Sherlock Holmes, Esq. To be left till called for. My friend tore it open and we all three read it together. It was dated at midnight of the preceding  night and ran in this way:
My dear Mr.  Sherlock  Holmes: You really did it very well. You took
me in completely. Until after the alarm of fire, I had not a suspicion. But then, when I found how I had betrayed my- self, I began to think. I had been warned against you months ago. I had  been told that if the King employed an agent it would certainly be you. And your address had been given me. Yet, with  all this, you made me reveal what you wanted to know. Even after I became suspicious, I found it hard to think evil of such a dear, kind old clergyman. But, you know, I have been trained as an actress myself. Male costume is noth- ing new to me. I often take advantage  of the freedom which it gives. I sent John, the coachman, to watch you, ran up stairs, got into my walking-clothes, as I call them, and came down just as you departed.
Well, I followed you to your  door, and so made sure that I was really an object of interest to the celebrated Mr. Sherlock Holmes. Then I, rather im- prudently, wished you good-night, and started for the Temple to see my hus- band.
We both thought the best resource was flight, when pursued by so formidable an antagonist; so you will find the nest empty when you call to- morrow. As to the photograph, your client may rest in peace. I love and am



loved by a better man than he.  The King may do what he will without hin- drance from one whom he has cruelly wronged. I keep it only to safeguard myself, and to preserve a weapon which will always secure me from any steps which he might take in the future. I leave a photograph which he might care to possess; and I remain, dear Mr. Sher- lock Holmes,
 Very truly yours, Irene Norton, nee Adler.
What a womanoh, what a woman! cried the King of Bohemia, when we had all three read this epistle. Did I not tell you how quick and resolute she was? Would she not have made an admirable queen? Is it not a pity that she was not on my level?
From what I have seen of the lady she seems in- deed to be on a very different level to your Majesty, said Holmes coldly. I am sorry that I have not been able to bring your Majestys business to a more suc- cessful conclusion.
On the contrary, my dear sir, cried the King; nothing could be more successful. I know that her word is inviolate.  The photograph is now as safe  as if it were in the fire.
I am glad to hear your Majesty say so.
I am immensely indebted to you. Pray tell me in what way I can reward you. This ring He slipped an emerald snake ring from his finger and held it out upon the palm of his hand.
Your Majesty has something which I should value even more highly, said Holmes.
You have but to name it. This photograph!
The King stared at him in amazement.
Irenes photograph! he cried. Certainly, if you wish it.
I thank your Majesty. Then there is no more to be done in the matter. I have the honour to wish you a very good-morning. He bowed, and, turning away without observing the hand which the King had stretched out to him, he set off in my company for his chambers.
And that was how a great scandal threatened  to affect the kingdom of Bohemia, and how the best plans of Mr. Sherlock Holmes were beaten by a womans wit. He used to make merry over the clev- erness of women, but I have not heard him do it of late. And when he speaks of Irene Adler, or when he refers to her photograph, it is always under the honourable title of the woman.




























The Red-Headed League





I
had called upon my friend, Mr. Sher- lock Holmes, one day in the autumn of last year and found him in deep conver- sation with a very stout, florid-faced, el-
derly gentleman with fiery red hair. With an apol- ogy for my intrusion, I was about to withdraw when Holmes pulled me abruptly into the room and closed the door behind me.
You could not possibly have come at a better time, my dear Watson, he said cordially.
I was afraid that you were engaged. So I am. Very much so.
Then I can wait in the next room.
Not at all. This gentleman, Mr. Wilson, has been my partner and helper in many of my most successful cases, and I have no doubt that he will be of the utmost use to me in yours also.
The stout gentleman half rose from his chair and gave a bob of greeting, with a quick little ques- tioning glance from his small fat-encircled eyes.
Try the settee, said Holmes, relapsing into his armchair and putting his fingertips together, as was his custom when in judicial moods. I know, my dear Watson, that you share my love of all that is bizarre and outside the conventions and humdrum routine of everyday life. You have shown your rel- ish for it by the enthusiasm which has prompted you to chronicle, and, if you will excuse my saying so, somewhat to embellish so many of my own little adventures.
Your cases have indeed been of the greatest interest to me, I observed.
You will remember that I remarked the other day, just before we went into the very simple prob- lem presented by Miss Mary Sutherland, that for strange effects and extraordinary combinations we must go to life itself, which is always far more daring than any effort of the imagination.
A proposition which I took the liberty of doubt- ing.
You did, Doctor, but none the less you must come round to my view, for otherwise I shall keep on piling fact upon fact on you until your reason breaks down under them and  acknowledges  me to be right. Now, Mr. Jabez Wilson here has been good enough to call upon me this morning,  and  to begin a narrative which promises to be one of the most singular which I have listened to for some time. You have heard me remark that the strangest and most unique things are very often connected not with the larger but with the smaller crimes, and occasionally, indeed, where there is room for doubt
whether any positive crime has been committed. As far as I have heard it is impossible for me to say whether the present case is an instance of crime or not, but the course of events is certainly among the most singular that I have ever listened to. Perhaps, Mr. Wilson, you would have the great kindness to recommence your narrative. I ask you not merely because my friend Dr. Watson has not heard the opening part but also because the peculiar nature of the story makes me anxious to have every pos- sible detail from your lips. As a rule, when I have heard some slight indication of the course of events, I am able to guide myself by the thousands of other similar cases which occur to my memory. In the present instance I am forced to admit that the facts are, to the best of my belief, unique.
The portly client puffed out his chest with an appearance of some little pride and pulled a dirty and wrinkled newspaper from the inside pocket of his greatcoat. As he glanced down the advertise- ment column, with his head thrust forward and the paper flattened out upon his knee, I took a good look at the man and endeavoured, after the fashion of my companion, to read the indications which might be presented by his dress or appearance.
I did not gain very much, however, by my in- spection. Our visitor  bore  every  mark  of  being an average commonplace British tradesman, obese, pompous, and slow. He wore rather baggy grey shepherds check trousers, a not over-clean black frock-coat, unbuttoned in the front, and a drab waistcoat with a heavy brassy Albert chain, and a square pierced bit of metal dangling down as an ornament. A frayed top-hat and a faded brown overcoat with a wrinkled velvet collar lay upon a chair beside him. Altogether, look as I would, there was nothing remarkable about the man save his blazing red head, and the expression of extreme chagrin and discontent upon his features.
Sherlock Holmes quick eye took in my occu- pation, and he shook his head with a smile as he noticed my questioning glances. Beyond the ob- vious facts that he has at some time done manual labour, that he takes snuff, that he is a Freemason, that he has been in China, and that he has done a considerable amount of writing lately, I can deduce nothing else.
Mr. Jabez Wilson started up in his chair, with his forefinger upon the paper, but his eyes upon my companion.
How, in the name of good-fortune, did you know all that, Mr. Holmes? he asked. How did you know, for example, that I did manual labour. Its as true as gospel, for I began as a ships carpen- ter.



Your hands, my dear sir. Your right hand is quite a size larger than your left. You have worked with it, and the muscles are more developed.
Well, the snuff, then, and the Freemasonry? I wont insult your intelligence by telling you
how I read that, especially as, rather against the
strict rules of your order, you use an arc-and- compass breastpin.
Ah, of course, I forgot that. But the writing? What else can be indicated by that right cuff
so very shiny for five inches, and the left one with
the smooth patch near the elbow where you rest it upon the desk?
Well, but China?
The fish that you have tattooed immediately above your right wrist could only have been done  in China. I have made a small study of tattoo marks and have even contributed to the literature of the subject. That trick of staining the fishes scales of a delicate pink is quite peculiar to China. When, in addition, I see a Chinese coin hanging from your watch-chain, the matter becomes even more sim- ple.
Mr. Jabez Wilson laughed heavily. Well, I never! said he. I thought at first that you had done something clever, but I see that there was nothing in it, after all.
I begin to think, Watson, said Holmes, that I make a mistake in explaining. Omne ignotum pro magnifico, you know, and my poor little reputation, such as it is, will suffer shipwreck if I am so candid. Can you not find the advertisement, Mr. Wilson?
Yes, I have got it now, he answered with his thick red finger planted halfway down the column. Here it is. This is what began it all.  You  just read it for yourself, sir.
I took the paper from him and read as follows:
To the Red-headed League: On ac- count of the bequest of the late Ezekiah Hopkins, of Lebanon, Pennsylvania, U.
S. A., there is now another vacancy open which entitles a member of the League to a salary of 4 a week for purely nom- inal services. All red-headed men who are sound in body and mind and above the age of twenty-one years, are eligi- ble. Apply in person on Monday, at eleven oclock, to Duncan Ross, at the offices of the League, 7 Popes Court, Fleet Street.
What on earth does this mean? I ejaculated after I had twice read over the extraordinary an- nouncement.
Holmes chuckled and wriggled in his chair, as was his habit when in high spirits. It is a little off the beaten track, isnt it? said he. And now, Mr. Wilson, off you go at scratch and tell us all about yourself, your household, and the effect which this advertisement had upon your fortunes. You will first make a note, Doctor, of the paper and the date.
It is The Morning Chronicle of April 27, 1890.
Just two months ago.
Very good. Now, Mr. Wilson?
Well, it is just as I have been telling you, Mr. Sherlock Holmes, said Jabez Wilson, mopping his forehead; I have a small pawnbrokers business at Coburg Square, near the City. Its not a very large affair, and of late years it has not done more than just give me a living. I used to be able to keep two assistants, but now I only keep one; and I would have a job to pay him but that he is willing to come for half wages so as to learn the business.
What is the name of this obliging youth? asked Sherlock Holmes.
His name is Vincent Spaulding, and hes not such a youth, either. Its hard to say his age. I should not wish a smarter assistant, Mr. Holmes; and I know very well that he could better himself and earn twice what I am able to give him. But, after all, if he is satisfied, why should I put ideas in his head?
Why, indeed? You seem most fortunate in hav- ing an employee who comes under the full market price. It is not a common experience among em- ployers in this age. I dont know that your assistant is not as remarkable as your advertisement.
Oh, he has his faults, too, said Mr. Wilson. Never was such a fellow for photography. Snap- ping away with a camera when he ought to be improving his mind, and then diving down into the cellar like a rabbit into its hole to develop his pictures. That is his main fault, but on the whole hes a good worker. Theres no vice in him.
He is still with you, I presume?
Yes, sir. He and a girl  of  fourteen,  who does a bit of simple cooking and keeps the place cleanthats all I have in the house, for I am a widower and never had any family. We live very quietly, sir, the three of us; and we keep a roof over our heads and pay our debts, if we do nothing more.
The first thing that put us out was that adver- tisement. Spaulding, he came down into the office



just this day eight weeks, with this very paper in his hand, and he says:
 I wish to the Lord, Mr. Wilson, that I was a red-headed man.
 Why that? I asks.
 Why, says he, heres another vacancy on the League of the Red-headed Men.  Its worth quite    a little fortune to any man who gets it, and I un- derstand that there are more vacancies than there are men, so that the trustees are at their wits end what to do with the money. If my hair would only change colour, heres a nice little crib all ready for me to step into.
 Why, what is it, then? I asked. You see, Mr. Holmes, I am a very stay-at-home man, and as my business came to me instead of my having to go    to it, I was often weeks on  end  without  putting my foot over the door-mat. In that way I didnt know much of what was going on outside, and I was always glad of a bit of news.
 Have you never heard of the League of the Red-headed Men? he asked with his eyes open.
 Never.
 Why, I wonder at that, for you are eligible yourself for one of the vacancies.
 And what are they worth? I asked.
 Oh, merely a couple of hundred a year, but the work is slight, and it need not interfere very much with ones other occupations.
Well, you can easily think that that made me prick up my ears, for the business has not been over-good for some years, and an extra couple of hundred would have been very handy.
 Tell me all about it, said I.
 Well, said he, showing me the advertisement, you can see for yourself that the League has a va- cancy, and there is the address where you should apply for particulars. As far as I can make out, the League was founded by an American millionaire, Ezekiah Hopkins, who was very peculiar in his ways. He was himself red-headed, and he had a great sympathy for all red-headed men; so when  he died it was found that he had left his enormous fortune in the hands of trustees, with instructions to apply the interest to the providing of easy berths to men whose hair is of that colour. From all I hear it is splendid pay and very little to do.
 But, said I, there would be millions of red- headed men who would apply.
 Not so many as you might think, he an- swered. You see it is really confined to Londoners, and to grown men. This American had started from
London when he was young, and he wanted to do the old town a good turn. Then, again, I have heard it is no use your applying if your hair is light red, or dark red, or anything but real bright, blazing, fiery red. Now, if you cared to apply, Mr. Wilson, you would just walk in; but perhaps it would hardly be worth your while to put yourself out of the way for the sake of a few hundred pounds.
Now, it is a fact, gentlemen, as you may  see  for yourselves, that my hair is of a very full and rich tint, so that it seemed to me that if there was to be any competition in the matter I stood as good a chance as any man that I had ever met. Vincent Spaulding seemed to know so much about it that    I thought he might prove useful, so I just ordered him to put up the shutters for the day and to come right away with me. He was very willing to have a holiday, so we shut the business up and started off for the address that was given us in the advertise- ment.
I never hope to see such a sight as that again, Mr. Holmes. From north, south, east, and west every man who had a shade of red in his hair had tramped into the city to answer the advertisement. Fleet Street was choked with red-headed folk, and Popes Court looked like a costers orange barrow.   I should not have thought there were so many in the whole country as were brought together by that single advertisement. Every shade of colour they werestraw, lemon, orange, brick, Irish-setter, liver, clay; but, as Spaulding said, there were not many who had the real vivid flame-coloured tint. When I saw how many were waiting, I would have given it up in despair; but Spaulding would not hear of it. How he did it I could not imagine, but he pushed and pulled and butted until he got me through the crowd, and right up to the steps which led to the office. There was a double stream upon the stair, some going up in hope, and some coming back dejected; but we wedged in as well as we could and soon found ourselves in the office.
Your experience has been a most entertaining one, remarked Holmes as his client paused and refreshed his memory with a huge pinch of snuff. Pray continue your very interesting statement.
There was nothing in the office but a couple  of wooden chairs and a deal table, behind which sat a small man with a head that was even redder than mine. He said a few words to each candidate as he came up, and then he always managed to find some fault in them which would disqualify them.  Getting a vacancy did not seem to be such  a very easy matter, after all. However, when our turn came the little man was much more favourable to me than to any of the others, and he closed the



door as we entered, so that he might have a private word with us.
 This is Mr. Jabez Wilson, said my assistant, and he is willing to fill a vacancy in the League.
 And he is admirably suited for it, the other answered. He has every requirement. I cannot recall when I have seen anything so fine.  He took a step backward, cocked his head on one side, and gazed at my hair until I felt quite bashful. Then suddenly he plunged forward, wrung my hand, and congratulated me warmly on my success.
 It would be injustice to hesitate, said he. You will, however, I am sure, excuse me for taking an obvious precaution. With that he seized my hair  in both his hands, and tugged until I yelled with the pain. There is water in your eyes, said he as  he released me. I perceive that all is as it should be. But we have to be careful, for we have twice been deceived by wigs and once by paint. I could tell you tales of cobblers wax which would disgust you with human nature. He stepped over to the window and shouted through it at the top of his voice that the vacancy was filled. A groan of dis- appointment came up from below, and the folk all trooped away in different directions until there was not a red-head to be seen except my own and that of the manager.
 My name, said he, is Mr. Duncan Ross, and I am myself one of the pensioners upon the fund left by our noble benefactor. Are you a married man, Mr. Wilson? Have you a family?
I answered that I had not. His face fell immediately.
 Dear me! he said gravely, that is very serious indeed! I am sorry to hear you say that. The fund was, of course, for the propagation and spread of the red-heads as well as for their maintenance. It is exceedingly unfortunate that you should be a bachelor.
My face lengthened at this, Mr. Holmes, for I thought that I was not to have the vacancy after all; but after thinking it over for a few minutes he said that it would be all right.
 In the case of another, said he, the objection might be fatal, but we must stretch a point in favour of a man with such a head of hair as yours. When shall you be able to enter upon your new duties?
 Well, it is a little awkward, for I have a busi- ness already, said I.
 Oh, never mind about that, Mr. Wilson! said Vincent Spaulding. I should be able to look after that for you.
 What would be the hours? I asked.  Ten to two.
Now a pawnbrokers business is mostly done of an evening, Mr. Holmes, especially Thursday and Friday evening, which is just before pay-day; so it would suit me very well to earn a little in the mornings. Besides, I knew that my assistant was a good man, and that he would see to anything that turned up.
 That would suit me very well, said I. And the pay?
 Is 4 a week.
 And the work?
 Is purely nominal.
 What do you call purely nominal?
 Well, you have to be in the office, or at least  in the building, the whole time. If you leave, you forfeit your whole position forever. The will is very clear upon that point. You dont comply with the conditions if you budge from the office during that time.
 Its only four hours a day, and I should not think of leaving, said I.
 No excuse will avail, said Mr. Duncan Ross; neither sickness nor business nor anything else. There you must stay, or you lose your billet.
 And the work?
 Is to copy out the Encyclopaedia Britannica. There is the first volume of it in that press. You must find your own ink, pens, and blotting-paper, but we provide this table and chair. Will you be ready to-morrow?
 Certainly, I answered.
 Then, good-bye, Mr. Jabez Wilson, and let me congratulate you once more on the important posi- tion which you have been fortunate enough to gain. He bowed me out of the room and I went home with my assistant, hardly knowing what to say or do, I was so pleased at my own good fortune.
Well, I thought over the matter all day, and by evening I was in low spirits again; for I had quite persuaded myself that the whole affair must be some great hoax or fraud, though what its object might be I could not imagine. It seemed altogether past belief that anyone could make such a will, or that they would pay such a sum for doing any- thing so simple as copying out the Encyclopaedia Britannica. Vincent Spaulding did what he could to cheer me up, but by bedtime I had reasoned myself out of the whole thing. However, in the morning I determined to have a look at it anyhow,



so I bought a penny bottle of ink, and with a quill- pen, and seven sheets of foolscap paper, I started off for Popes Court.
Well, to my surprise and delight, everything was as right as possible. The table was set out ready for me, and Mr. Duncan Ross was there to see that I got fairly to work. He started me off upon the letter A, and then he left me; but he would drop in from time to time to see that all was right with me. At two oclock he bade me good-day, complimented me upon the amount that I had written, and locked the door of the office after me.
This went on day after day, Mr. Holmes,  and on Saturday the manager came in and planked down four golden sovereigns for my weeks work. It was the same next week, and the same the week after. Every morning I was there at ten, and every afternoon I left at two. By degrees Mr. Duncan Ross took to coming in only once of a morning, and then, after a time, he did not come in at all. Still, of course, I never dared to leave the room for an instant, for I was not sure when he might come, and the billet was such a good one, and suited me so well, that I would not risk the loss of it.
Eight weeks passed away like this, and I had written about Abbots and Archery and Armour  and Architecture and Attica, and hoped with dili- gence that I might get on to the Bs before very long. It cost me something in foolscap, and I had pretty nearly filled a shelf with my writings. And then suddenly the whole business came to an end.
To an end?
Yes, sir. And no later than this morning. I went to my work as usual at ten oclock, but the door was shut and locked, with a little square of cardboard hammered on to the middle of the panel with a tack. Here it is, and you can read for yourself.
He held up a piece of white cardboard about the size of a sheet of note-paper. It read in this fashion:
The Red-headed League is
Dissolved
October 9, 1890.
Sherlock Holmes and I surveyed this curt an- nouncement and the rueful face behind it, until the comical side of the affair so completely overtopped every other consideration that we both burst out into a roar of laughter.
I cannot see that there is anything very funny, cried our client, flushing up to the roots of his flam- ing head. If you can do nothing better than laugh at me, I can go elsewhere.
No, no, cried Holmes, shoving him back into the chair from which he had half risen. I really wouldnt miss your case for the world. It is most re- freshingly unusual. But there is, if you will excuse my saying so, something just a little funny about it. Pray what steps did you take when you found the card upon the door?
I was staggered, sir.  I did not know what to  do. Then I called at the offices round, but none of them seemed to know anything about it. Finally, I went to the landlord, who is an accountant living on the ground-floor, and I asked him if he could tell me what had become of the Red-headed League. He said that he had never heard of any such body. Then I asked him who Mr. Duncan Ross was. He answered that the name was new to him.
 Well, said I, the gentleman at No. 4.  What, the red-headed man?
 Yes.
 Oh, said he, his name was William Morris. He was a solicitor and was using my room as a tem- porary convenience until his new premises were ready. He moved out yesterday.
 Where could I find him?
 Oh, at his new offices. He did tell me the ad- dress. Yes, 17 King Edward Street, near St. Pauls.
I started off, Mr. Holmes, but when I got to that address it was a manufactory of artificial knee- caps, and no one in it had ever heard of either Mr. William Morris or Mr. Duncan Ross.
And what did you  do then? asked Holmes.   I went home to Saxe-Coburg Square, and I took
the advice of my assistant. But he could not help
me in any way. He could only say that if I waited I should hear by post. But that was not quite good enough, Mr.  Holmes.  I did not wish to lose such   a place without a struggle, so, as I had heard that you were good enough to give advice to poor folk who were in need of it, I came right away to you.
And you did very wisely, said Holmes. Your case is an exceedingly remarkable one, and I shall be happy to look into it. From what you have told me I think that it is possible that graver issues hang from it than might at first sight appear.
Grave enough! said Mr. Jabez Wilson. Why, I have lost four pound a week.
As far as you are personally concerned, re- marked Holmes, I do not see that you have any grievance against this extraordinary league. On the contrary, you are, as I understand, richer by some
30, to say nothing of the minute knowledge which you have gained on every subject which comes un- der the letter A. You have lost nothing by them.



No, sir. But I want to find out about them, and who they are, and what their object was in playing this prankif it was a prankupon me. It was a pretty expensive joke for them, for it cost them two and thirty pounds.
We shall endeavour to clear up these points for you. And, first, one or two questions, Mr. Wilson. This assistant of yours who first called your atten- tion to the advertisementhow long had he been with you?
About a month then. How did he come?
In answer to an advertisement. Was he the only applicant? No, I had a dozen.
Why did you pick him?
Because he was handy and would come cheap.
At half-wages, in fact. Yes.
What is he like, this Vincent Spaulding?
Small, stout-built, very quick in his ways, no hair on his face, though hes not short of thirty. Has a white splash of acid upon his forehead.
Holmes sat up in his chair in considerable ex- citement. I thought as  much,  said  he.  Have you ever observed that his ears are pierced for ear- rings?
Yes, sir. He told me that a gipsy had done it for him when he was a lad.
Hum! said Holmes, sinking back in deep thought. He is still with you?
Oh, yes, sir; I have only just left him.
And has your business been attended to in your absence?
Nothing to complain of, sir. Theres never very much to do of a morning.
That will do, Mr. Wilson. I shall be happy to give you an opinion upon the subject in the course of a day or two. To-day is Saturday, and I hope that by Monday we may come to a conclusion.
Well, Watson, said Holmes when our visitor had left us, what do you make of it all?
I make nothing of it, I answered frankly. It  is a most mysterious business.
As a rule, said Holmes, the more bizarre a thing is the less mysterious it proves to be. It is your commonplace, featureless crimes which are really puzzling, just as a commonplace face is the
most difficult to identify. But I must be prompt over this matter.
What are you going to do, then? I asked. To  smoke, he answered.  It is quite a three
pipe problem, and I beg that you wont speak to me
for fifty minutes. He curled himself up in his chair, with his thin knees drawn up to his hawk-like nose, and there he sat with his eyes closed and his black clay pipe thrusting out like the bill of some strange bird. I had come to the conclusion that he had dropped asleep, and indeed was nodding myself, when he suddenly sprang out of his chair with the gesture of a man who has made up his mind and put his pipe down upon the mantelpiece.
Sarasate plays at the St. Jamess Hall this after- noon, he remarked. What do you think, Watson? Could your patients spare you for a few hours?
I have nothing to do to-day. My practice is never very absorbing.
Then put on your hat and come. I am going through the City first, and we can have some lunch on the way. I observe that there is a good deal of German music on the programme, which is rather more to my taste than Italian or French. It is intro- spective, and I want to introspect. Come along!
We travelled by the Underground as far as Aldersgate; and a short walk took us to Saxe- Coburg Square, the scene of the singular story which we had listened to in the morning. It was a poky, little, shabby-genteel place, where four lines of dingy two-storied brick houses looked out into   a small railed-in enclosure, where a lawn of weedy grass and a few clumps of faded laurel-bushes made a hard fight against a smoke-laden and un- congenial atmosphere. Three gilt balls and a brown board with Jabez Wilson in white letters, upon    a corner house, announced the place where our red-headed client carried on his business. Sher- lock Holmes stopped in front of it with his head   on one side and looked it all over, with his eyes shining brightly between puckered lids. Then he walked slowly up the street, and then down again to the corner, still looking keenly at the houses. Fi- nally he returned to the pawnbrokers, and, having thumped vigorously upon the pavement with his stick two or three times, he went up to the door  and knocked. It was instantly opened by a bright- looking, clean-shaven young fellow, who asked him to step in.
Thank you, said Holmes,  I  only  wished to ask you how you would go from here to the Strand.
Third right, fourth left, answered the assistant promptly, closing the door.



Smart fellow, that, observed Holmes as we walked away. He is, in my judgment, the fourth smartest man in London, and for daring I am not sure that he has not a claim to be third. I have known something of him before.
Evidently, said I, Mr. Wilsons assistant counts for a good deal in this mystery of the Red- headed League. I am sure that you inquired your way merely in order that you might see him.
Not him. What then?
The knees of his trousers. And what did you see? What I expected to see.
Why did you beat the pavement?
My dear doctor, this is a time for observation, not for talk. We are spies in an enemys country.  We know something of Saxe-Coburg Square.  Let us now explore the parts which lie behind it.
The road in which we found ourselves as we turned round the corner from the retired Saxe- Coburg Square presented  as  great  a  contrast  to it as the front of a picture does to the back. It was one of the main arteries which conveyed the traffic of the City to the north and west.  The roadway  was blocked with the immense stream of commerce flowing in a double tide inward and outward, while the footpaths were black with the hurrying swarm of pedestrians. It was difficult to realise as we looked at the line of fine shops and stately business premises that they really abutted on the other side upon the faded and stagnant square which we had just quitted.
Let me see, said Holmes, standing at the cor- ner and glancing along the line, I should like just to remember the order of the houses here.   It is     a hobby of mine to have an exact knowledge of London. There is Mortimers, the tobacconist, the little newspaper shop, the Coburg branch of the City and Suburban Bank, the Vegetarian Restaurant, and McFarlanes carriage-building depot. That car- ries us right on to the other block. And now, Doctor, weve done our work, so its time we had some play. A sandwich and a cup of coffee, and then off to violin-land, where all is sweetness and delicacy and harmony, and there are no red-headed clients to vex us with their conundrums.
My friend was an enthusiastic musician, being himself not only a very capable performer but a composer of no ordinary merit. All the afternoon he sat in the stalls wrapped in the most perfect happiness, gently waving his long, thin fingers in
time to the music, while his gently smiling  face and his languid, dreamy eyes were as unlike those of Holmes the sleuth-hound, Holmes the relent- less, keen-witted, ready-handed criminal agent, as it was possible to conceive. In his singular charac- ter the dual nature alternately asserted itself, and his extreme exactness and astuteness represented, as I have often thought, the reaction against the poetic and contemplative mood which occasion- ally predominated in him. The swing of his nature took him from extreme languor to devouring en- ergy; and, as I knew well, he was never so truly formidable as when, for days on end, he had been lounging in his armchair amid his improvisations and his black-letter editions. Then it was that the lust of the chase would suddenly come upon him, and that his brilliant reasoning power would rise  to the level of intuition, until those who were un- acquainted with his methods would look askance at him as on a man whose knowledge was not that of other mortals. When I saw him that afternoon  so enwrapped in the music at St. Jamess Hall I  felt that an evil time might be coming upon those whom he had set himself to hunt down.
You want to go home, no doubt, Doctor, he remarked as we emerged.
Yes, it would be as well.
And I have some business to do which will take some hours. This business at Coburg Square is serious.
Why serious?
A considerable crime is in contemplation. I have every reason to believe that we shall be in time to stop it. But to-day being Saturday rather complicates matters. I shall want your help to- night.
At what time?
Ten will be early enough.
I shall be at Baker Street at ten.
Very well. And, I say, Doctor, there may be some little danger, so kindly put your army re- volver in your pocket. He waved his hand, turned on his heel, and disappeared in an instant among the crowd.
I trust that I am not more dense than my neigh- bours, but I was  always  oppressed  with  a  sense of my own stupidity in my dealings with Sherlock Holmes. Here I had heard what he had heard, I had seen what he had seen, and yet from his words it was evident that he saw clearly not only what had happened but what was  about  to  happen,  while to me the whole business was still confused and grotesque. As I drove home to my house in Kens- ington I thought over it all, from the extraordinary



story of the red-headed copier of the Encyclopae- dia down to the visit to Saxe-Coburg Square, and the ominous words with which he had parted from me. What was this nocturnal expedition, and why should I go armed? Where were we going, and what were we to do? I had the hint from Holmes that this smooth-faced pawnbrokers assistant was a formidable mana man who might play a deep game. I tried to puzzle it out, but gave it up in despair and set the matter aside until night should bring an explanation.
It was a quarter-past nine when I started from home and made my way across the Park, and so through Oxford Street to Baker Street. Two han- soms were standing at the door, and as I entered the passage I heard the sound of voices from above. On entering his room I found Holmes in animated con- versation with two men, one of whom I recognised as Peter Jones, the official police agent, while the other was a long, thin, sad-faced man, with a very shiny hat and oppressively respectable frock-coat.
Ha! Our party is complete, said Holmes, but- toning up his pea-jacket and taking his heavy hunt- ing crop from the rack. Watson, I think you know Mr. Jones, of Scotland Yard? Let me introduce you to Mr. Merryweather, who is to be our companion in to-nights adventure.
Were hunting in couples again, Doctor, you see, said Jones in his consequential way. Our friend here is a wonderful man for starting a chase. All he wants is an old dog to help him to do the running down.
I hope a wild goose may not prove to be the end of our chase, observed Mr. Merryweather gloomily.
You may place considerable confidence in Mr. Holmes, sir, said the police agent loftily. He has his own little methods, which are, if he wont mind my saying so, just a little too theoretical and fan- tastic, but he has the makings of a detective in him. It is not too much to say that once or twice, as in that business of the Sholto murder and the Agra treasure, he has been more nearly correct than the official force.
Oh, if you say so, Mr. Jones, it is all right,  said the stranger with deference. Still, I confess that I miss my rubber. It is the first Saturday night for seven-and-twenty years that I have not had my rubber.
I think you will find, said Sherlock Holmes, that you will play for a higher stake to-night than you have ever done yet, and that the play will be more exciting. For you, Mr. Merryweather, the
stake will be some 30,000; and for you, Jones, it will be the man upon whom you wish to lay your hands.
John Clay, the murderer, thief, smasher, and forger. Hes a young man, Mr. Merryweather, but he is at the head of his profession, and I would rather have my bracelets on him than on any crim- inal in London. Hes a remarkable man, is young John Clay. His grandfather was a royal duke, and he himself has been to Eton and Oxford. His brain is as cunning as his fingers, and though we meet signs of him at every turn, we never  know where  to find the man himself. Hell crack a crib in Scot- land one week, and be raising money to build an orphanage in Cornwall the next. Ive been on his track for years and have never set eyes on him yet.
I hope that I may have the pleasure of intro- ducing you to-night. Ive had one or two little turns also with Mr. John Clay, and I agree with you that he is at the head of his profession. It is past ten, however, and quite time that we started. If you two will take the first hansom, Watson and I will follow in the second.
Sherlock Holmes was not very communicative during the long drive and lay back in the cab hum- ming the tunes which he had heard in the afternoon. We rattled through an endless labyrinth of gas-lit streets until we emerged into Farrington Street.
We are close there now, my friend remarked. This fellow Merryweather is a bank director, and personally interested in the matter. I thought it as well to have Jones with us also. He is not a bad fellow, though an absolute imbecile in his profes- sion. He has one positive virtue.  He is as brave  as a bulldog and as tenacious as a lobster if he gets  his claws upon anyone. Here we are, and they are waiting for us.
We had reached the same crowded thorough- fare in which we had found ourselves in the morn- ing. Our cabs were dismissed, and, following the guidance of Mr. Merryweather, we passed down a narrow passage and through a side door, which he opened for us. Within there was a small corridor, which ended in a very massive iron gate. This also was opened, and led down a flight of winding stone steps, which terminated at another formidable gate. Mr. Merryweather stopped to light a lantern, and then conducted us down a dark, earth-smelling passage,  and so,  after opening a third door,  into  a huge vault or cellar, which was piled all round with crates and massive boxes.
You are not very vulnerable from above, Holmes remarked as he held up the lantern and gazed about him.



Nor from below, said Mr. Merryweather, strik- ing his stick upon the flags which lined the floor. Why, dear me, it sounds quite hollow! he re- marked, looking up in surprise.
I must really ask you to be a little more quiet! said Holmes severely. You have already imperilled the whole success of our expedition. Might I beg that you would have the goodness to sit down upon one of those boxes, and not to interfere?
The solemn Mr. Merryweather perched himself upon a crate, with a very injured expression upon his face, while Holmes fell upon his knees upon the floor and, with the lantern and a magnifying lens, began to examine minutely the cracks between the stones. A few seconds sufficed to satisfy him, for he sprang to his feet again and put his glass in his pocket.
We have at least an hour before us, he re- marked, for they can hardly take any steps until the good pawnbroker is safely in bed. Then they will not lose a minute, for the sooner they do their work the longer time they will have for their escape. We are at present, Doctoras no doubt you have divinedin the cellar of the City branch of one of the principal London banks. Mr. Merryweather is the chairman of directors, and he will explain to you that there are reasons why the more daring criminals of London should take a considerable interest in this cellar at present.
It is our French gold, whispered the direc- tor. We have had several warnings that an attempt might be made upon it.
Your French gold?
Yes. We had occasion some months ago to strengthen our resources and borrowed for that purpose 30,000 napoleons from the Bank of France. It has become known that we have never had occa- sion to unpack the money, and that it is still lying in our cellar. The crate upon which I sit contains 2,000 napoleons packed between layers of lead foil. Our reserve of bullion is much larger at present than   is usually kept in a single branch office, and the directors have had misgivings upon the subject.
Which were very well justified, observed Holmes. And now it is  time  that  we  arranged our little plans. I expect that within an hour mat- ters will come to a head. In the meantime Mr. Merryweather, we must put the screen over that dark lantern.
And sit in the dark?
I am afraid so. I had brought a pack of cards in my pocket, and I thought that, as we were a partie carree, you might have your rubber after all. But I
see that the enemys preparations have gone so far that we cannot risk the presence of a light. And, first of all, we must choose our positions. These are daring men, and though we shall take them at a dis- advantage, they may do us some harm unless we are careful. I shall stand behind this crate, and do you  conceal yourselves behind those.  Then, when I flash a light upon them, close in swiftly. If they fire, Watson, have no compunction about shooting them down.
I placed my revolver, cocked, upon the top of the wooden case behind which I crouched. Holmes shot the slide across the front of his lantern and left us in pitch darknesssuch an absolute darkness as I have never before experienced. The smell of hot metal remained to assure us that the light was still there, ready to flash out at a moments notice. To me, with my nerves worked up to a pitch of expectancy, there was something depressing and subduing in the sudden gloom, and in the cold dank air of the vault.
They have but one retreat, whispered Holmes. That is back through the house into Saxe-Coburg Square. I hope that you have done what I asked you, Jones?
I have an inspector and two officers waiting at the front door.
Then we have stopped all the holes. And now we must be silent and wait.
What a time it seemed! From comparing notes afterwards it was but an hour and a quarter, yet it appeared to me that the night must have almost gone and the dawn be breaking above us. My limbs were weary and stiff, for I feared to change my posi- tion; yet my nerves were worked up to the highest pitch of tension, and my hearing was so acute that  I could not only hear the gentle breathing of my companions, but I could distinguish the deeper, heavier in-breath of the bulky Jones from the thin, sighing note of the bank director. From my position I could look over the case in the direction of the floor. Suddenly my eyes caught the glint of a light.
At first it was but a lurid spark upon the stone pavement. Then it lengthened out until it became a yellow line, and then, without any warning or sound, a gash seemed to open and a hand appeared, a white, almost womanly hand, which felt about in the centre of the little area of light. For a minute or more the hand, with its writhing fingers, pro- truded out of the floor. Then it was withdrawn as suddenly as it appeared, and all was dark again save the single lurid spark which marked a chink between the stones.



Its disappearance, however, was but momentary. With a rending, tearing sound, one of the broad, white stones turned over upon its side and left a square, gaping hole, through which streamed the light of a lantern. Over the edge there peeped a clean-cut, boyish face, which looked keenly about it, and then, with a hand on either side of the aperture, drew itself shoulder-high and waist-high, until one knee rested upon the edge. In another instant he stood at the side of the hole and was hauling after him a companion, lithe and small like himself, with a pale face and a shock of very red hair.
Its all clear, he whispered. Have you the chisel and the bags? Great Scott! Jump, Archie, jump, and Ill swing for it!
Sherlock Holmes had sprung out and seized the intruder by the collar. The other dived down the hole, and I heard the sound of rending cloth  as Jones clutched at his skirts. The light flashed upon the barrel of a revolver, but Holmes hunting crop came down on the mans wrist, and the pistol clinked upon the stone floor.
Its no use, John Clay, said Holmes blandly. You have no chance at all.
So I see, the other answered with the utmost coolness. I fancy that my pal is all right, though I see you have got his coat-tails.
There are three men waiting for him at the door, said Holmes.
Oh, indeed! You seem to have done the thing very completely. I must compliment you.
And I you, Holmes answered. Your red- headed idea was very new and effective.
Youll see your pal again presently, said Jones. Hes quicker at climbing down holes than I am. Just hold out while I fix the derbies.
I beg that you will not touch me with your filthy hands, remarked our prisoner as the hand- cuffs clattered upon his wrists. You may not be aware that I have royal blood in my veins. Have the goodness, also, when you address me always to say sir and please. 
All right, said Jones with a stare and a snig- ger. Well, would you please, sir, march upstairs, where we can get a cab to carry your Highness to the police-station?
That is better, said John Clay serenely. He made a sweeping bow to the three of us and walked quietly off in the custody of the detective.
Really, Mr. Holmes, said Mr. Merryweather as we followed them from the cellar, I do not know how the bank can thank you or repay you. There
is no doubt that you have  detected  and defeated  in the most complete manner one of the most de- termined attempts at bank robbery that have ever come within my experience.
I have had one or two little scores of my own to settle with Mr. John Clay, said Holmes. I have been at some small expense over this matter, which I shall expect the bank to refund, but beyond that  I am amply repaid by having had an experience which is in many ways unique,  and  by  hearing the very remarkable narrative of the Red-headed League.
You see, Watson, he explained in the early hours of the morning as we sat over a glass of whisky and soda in Baker Street, it was perfectly obvious from the first that the only possible object of this rather fantastic business of the advertisement of the League, and the copying of the Encyclopae- dia, must be to get this not over-bright pawnbroker out of the way  for a number of hours every day.      It was a curious way of managing it, but, really, it would be difficult to suggest a better. The method was no doubt suggested to Clays ingenious mind by the colour of his accomplices hair. The 4 a week was a lure which must draw him, and what was it to them, who were playing for thousands? They put in the advertisement, one rogue has the temporary office, the other rogue incites the man to apply for it, and together they manage to secure his absence every morning in the week. From the time that I heard of the assistant having come for half wages, it was obvious to me that he had some strong motive for securing the situation.
But how could you guess what the motive was?
Had there been women in the house, I should have suspected a mere vulgar intrigue. That, how- ever, was out of the question. The mans business was a small one, and there was nothing in his house which could account for such elaborate prepara- tions, and such an expenditure as they were at. It must, then, be something out of the house. What could it be? I thought of the assistants fondness for photography, and his trick of vanishing into the cellar. The cellar! There was the end of this tangled clue. Then I made inquiries as to this mysterious assistant and found that I had to deal with one of the coolest and most daring criminals in London. He was doing something in the cellarsomething which took many hours a day for months on end. What could it be, once more? I could think of noth- ing save that he was running a tunnel to some other building.
So far I had got when we went to visit the scene of action. I surprised you by beating upon



the pavement with my stick. I was ascertaining whether the cellar stretched out in front or behind. It was  not in  front.  Then  I rang the bell,  and,  as I hoped, the assistant answered it. We have had some skirmishes, but we had never set eyes upon each other before. I hardly looked at his face. His knees were what I wished to see. You must yourself have remarked how worn, wrinkled, and stained they were. They spoke of those hours of burrow- ing. The only remaining point was what they were burrowing for. I walked round the corner, saw the City and Suburban Bank abutted on our friends premises, and felt that I had solved my problem. When you drove home after the concert I called upon Scotland Yard and upon the chairman of the bank directors, with the result that you have seen.
And how could you tell that they would make their attempt to-night? I asked.
Well, when they closed their League offices that was a sign that they cared no longer about Mr.
Jabez Wilsons presencein other words, that they had completed their tunnel. But it was essential that they should use it soon, as it might be discov- ered, or the bullion might be removed. Saturday would suit them better than any other day, as it would give them two days for their escape. For all these reasons I expected them to come to-night.
You reasoned it out beautifully, I exclaimed in unfeigned admiration. It is so long a chain, and yet every link rings true.
It saved me from ennui, he answered, yawn- ing. Alas! I already feel it closing in upon me. My life is spent in one long effort to escape from the commonplaces of existence. These little problems help me to do so.
And you are a benefactor of the race, said I. He shrugged his shoulders. Well, perhaps,
after all,  it  is  of  some  little  use,  he  remarked.  Lhomme cest rienloeuvre cest tout, as Gustave Flaubert wrote to George Sand.




























A Case of Identity





M
y dear fellow, said Sherlock Holmes as we sat on either side of the fire in his lodgings at Baker Street, life is infinitely stranger than anything which the mind
of man could invent. We would not dare to conceive the things which are really mere commonplaces of existence. If we could fly out of that window hand in hand, hover over this great city, gently remove the roofs, and peep in at the queer things which are going on, the strange coincidences, the plannings, the cross-purposes, the wonderful chains of events, working through generations, and leading to the most outre  results, it would make all fiction with its conventionalities and foreseen conclusions most stale and unprofitable.
And yet I am not convinced of it, I answered. The cases which come to light in the papers are, as a rule, bald enough, and vulgar enough. We  have  in our police reports realism pushed to its extreme limits, and yet the result is, it must be confessed, neither fascinating nor artistic.
A certain selection and discretion must be used in producing a realistic effect, remarked Holmes. This is wanting in the police report, where more stress is laid, perhaps, upon the platitudes of the magistrate than upon the details, which to an ob- server contain the vital essence of the whole matter. Depend upon it, there is nothing so unnatural as the commonplace.
I smiled and shook my head. I can quite un- derstand your thinking so. I said. Of course, in your position of unofficial adviser and helper to everybody who is absolutely puzzled, throughout three continents, you are brought in contact with all that is strange and bizarre. But hereI picked up the morning paper from the groundlet  us put it to a practical test. Here is the first heading upon which I come. A husbands cruelty to his wife. There is half a column of print, but I know without reading it that it is all perfectly familiar to me. There is, of course, the other woman, the drink, the push, the blow, the bruise, the sympathetic sis- ter or landlady. The crudest of writers could invent nothing more crude.
Indeed, your example is an unfortunate one for your argument, said Holmes, taking the paper and glancing his eye down it. This is the Dundas separation case, and, as it happens, I was engaged in clearing up some small points in connection with it. The husband was a teetotaler, there was no other woman, and the conduct complained of was that he had drifted into the habit of winding up every meal by taking out his false teeth and hurling them at his wife, which, you will allow, is not an action likely to
occur to the imagination of the average story-teller. Take a pinch of snuff, Doctor, and acknowledge that I have scored over you in your example.
He held out his snuffbox of old gold, with a great amethyst in the centre of the lid. Its splen- dour was in such contrast to his homely ways and simple life that I could not help commenting upon it.
Ah, said he, I forgot that I had not seen you for some weeks. It is a little souvenir from the King of Bohemia in return for my assistance in the case of the Irene Adler papers.
And the ring? I asked, glancing at a remark- able brilliant which sparkled upon his finger.
It was from the reigning family of Holland, though the matter in which I served them was of such delicacy that I cannot confide it even to you, who have been good enough to chronicle one or two of my little problems.
And have you any on hand just now? I asked with interest.
Some ten or twelve, but none which present any feature of interest. They are important, you understand, without being interesting. Indeed, I have found that it is usually in unimportant mat- ters that there is a field for the observation, and for the quick analysis of cause and effect which gives the charm to an investigation. The larger crimes are apt to be the simpler, for the bigger the crime the more obvious, as a rule, is the motive. In these cases, save for one rather intricate matter which has been referred to me from Marseilles, there is nothing which presents any features of interest. It is possible, however, that I may have something better before very many minutes are over, for this is one of my clients, or I am much mistaken.
He had risen from his chair and was standing between the parted blinds gazing down into the dull neutral-tinted London street.  Looking  over his shoulder, I saw that on the pavement opposite there stood a large woman with a heavy fur boa round her neck, and a large curling red feather in  a broad-brimmed hat which was tilted in a coquet- tish Duchess of Devonshire fashion over her ear. From under this great panoply she peeped up in a nervous, hesitating fashion at our windows, while her body oscillated backward and forward, and her fingers fidgeted with her glove buttons. Suddenly, with a plunge, as of the swimmer who leaves the bank, she hurried across the road, and we heard the sharp clang of the bell.
I have seen those symptoms before, said Holmes, throwing his cigarette into the fire. Oscil- lation upon the pavement always means an affaire



de coeur. She would like advice, but is not sure that the matter is not too delicate for communication. And yet even here we may discriminate. When a woman has been seriously wronged by a man she no longer oscillates, and the usual symptom is a broken bell wire. Here we may take it that there is  a love matter, but that the maiden is not so much angry as perplexed, or grieved. But here she comes in person to resolve our doubts.
As he spoke there was a tap at the door,  and  the boy in buttons entered to announce Miss Mary Sutherland, while the lady herself loomed behind his small black figure like a full-sailed merchant- man behind a tiny pilot boat. Sherlock Holmes welcomed her with the easy courtesy for which he was remarkable, and, having closed the door and bowed her into an armchair, he looked her over in the minute and yet abstracted fashion which was peculiar to him.
Do you not find, he said, that with your short sight it is a little trying to do so much typewriting?
I did at first, she answered, but now I know where the letters are without looking. Then, sud- denly realising the full purport of his words, she gave a violent start and looked up, with fear and as- tonishment upon her broad, good-humoured face. Youve heard about me, Mr. Holmes, she cried, else how could you know all that?
Never mind, said Holmes, laughing; it is my business to know things. Perhaps I have trained myself to see what others overlook. If not, why should you come to consult me?
I came to you, sir, because I heard of you from Mrs. Etherege, whose husband you found so easy when the police and everyone had given him up for dead. Oh, Mr.  Holmes,  I wish you  would do  as much for me. Im not rich, but still I have a hundred a year in my own right, besides the little that I make by the machine, and I would give it all to know what has become of Mr. Hosmer Angel.
Why did you come away to consult me in such a hurry? asked Sherlock Holmes, with his finger- tips together and his eyes to the ceiling.
Again a startled look came over the somewhat vacuous  face  of  Miss  Mary  Sutherland.   Yes, I did bang out of the house, she said, for it made me angry to see the easy way in which Mr. Windibankthat is, my fathertook it all. He would not go to the police, and he would not go to you, and so at last, as he would do nothing and kept on saying that there was no harm done, it made me mad, and I just on with my things and came right away to you.
Your father, said Holmes, your stepfather, surely, since the name is different.
Yes, my stepfather. I call him father, though it sounds funny, too, for he is only five years and two months older than myself.
And your mother is alive?
Oh, yes, mother is alive and well.  I  wasnt best pleased, Mr. Holmes, when she married again so soon after fathers death, and a man who was nearly fifteen years younger than herself. Father was a plumber in the Tottenham Court Road, and he left a tidy business behind him, which mother carried on with Mr. Hardy, the foreman; but when Mr. Windibank came he made her sell the business, for he was very superior, being a traveller in wines. They got 4700 for the goodwill and interest, which wasnt near as much as father could have got if he had been alive.
I had expected to see Sherlock Holmes impa- tient under this rambling and inconsequential nar- rative, but, on the contrary, he had listened with the greatest concentration of attention.
Your own little income, he asked, does it come out of the business?
Oh, no, sir. It is quite separate and was  left  me by my uncle Ned in Auckland. It is in New Zealand stock, paying 41/2 per cent. Two thousand five hundred pounds was the amount, but I can only touch the interest.
You interest me extremely, said Holmes. And since you draw so large a sum as a hundred a year, with what you earn into the bargain, you no doubt travel a little and indulge yourself in every way. I believe that a single lady can get on very nicely upon an income of about 60.
I could do with much less than that, Mr. Holmes, but you understand that as long as I live  at home I dont wish to be a burden to them, and so they have the use of the money just while I am staying with them. Of course, that is only just for the time. Mr. Windibank draws my interest every quarter and pays it over to mother, and I find that I can do pretty well with what I earn at typewriting. It brings me twopence a sheet, and I can often do from fifteen to twenty sheets in a day.
You have made your position very clear to me, said Holmes. This is my friend, Dr. Watson, be- fore whom you can speak as freely as before myself. Kindly tell us now all about your connection with Mr. Hosmer Angel.
A flush stole over Miss Sutherlands face, and she picked nervously at the  fringe  of  her  jacket. I met him first at the gasfitters ball, she said. They used to send father tickets when he was alive,



and then afterwards they remembered us, and sent them to mother.  Mr.  Windibank did not wish us  to go. He never did wish us to go anywhere. He would get quite mad if I wanted so much as to join a Sunday-school treat. But this time I was set on going, and I would go; for what right had he to prevent? He said the folk were not fit for us to know, when all fathers friends were to be there. And he said that I had nothing fit to wear, when I had my purple plush that I had never so much as taken out of the drawer. At last, when nothing else would do, he went off to France upon the business of the firm, but we went, mother and I, with Mr. Hardy, who used to be our foreman, and it was there I met Mr. Hosmer Angel.
I suppose, said Holmes, that when Mr. Windibank came back from France he was very annoyed at your having gone to the ball.
Oh, well, he was very good about it. He laughed, I remember, and shrugged his shoulders, and said there was no use denying anything to a woman, for she would have her way.
I see.  Then at the gasfitters ball you  met,  as  I understand, a gentleman called Mr. Hosmer An- gel.
Yes, sir. I met him that night, and he called next day to ask if we had got home all safe, and after that we met himthat is to say, Mr. Holmes, I met him twice for walks, but after that father came back again, and Mr. Hosmer Angel could not come to the house any more.
No?
Well, you know father didnt like anything of the sort. He wouldnt have any visitors if he could help it, and he used to say that a woman should be happy in her own family circle. But then, as I used to say to mother, a woman wants her own circle to begin with, and I had not got mine yet.
But how about Mr. Hosmer Angel? Did he make no attempt to see you?
Well,  father was  going off to France again in   a week, and Hosmer wrote and said that it would be safer and better not to see each other until he had gone. We could write in the meantime, and he used to write every day. I took the letters in in the morning, so there was no need for father to know.
Were you engaged to the gentleman at this time?
Oh, yes, Mr. Holmes. We were engaged af- ter the first walk that we took. HosmerMr. Angelwas a cashier in an office in Leadenhall Streetand
What office?
Thats the worst of it, Mr. Holmes, I dont know.
Where did he live, then? He slept on the premises.
And you dont know his address? Noexcept that it was Leadenhall Street. Where did you address your letters, then?
To the Leadenhall Street Post Office, to be left till called for. He said that if they were sent to the office he would be chaffed by all the other clerks about having letters from a lady, so I offered to typewrite them, like he did his, but he wouldnt have that, for he said that when I wrote them they seemed to come from me, but when they were type- written he always felt that the machine had come between us. That will just show you how fond he was of me, Mr. Holmes, and the little things that he would think of.
It was most suggestive, said Holmes. It has long been an axiom of mine that the little things are infinitely the most important. Can you remember any other little things about Mr. Hosmer Angel?
He was a very shy man, Mr. Holmes. He would rather walk with me in the evening than in the day- light, for he said that he hated to be conspicuous. Very retiring and gentlemanly he was. Even his voice was gentle. Hed had the quinsy and swollen glands when he was young, he  told  me,  and  it had left him with a weak throat, and a hesitating, whispering fashion of speech. He was always well dressed, very neat and plain, but his eyes were weak, just as mine are, and he wore tinted glasses against the glare.
Well, and what happened when Mr. Windibank, your stepfather, returned to France?
Mr. Hosmer Angel came to the house again and proposed that we should marry before father came back. He was in dreadful earnest and made me swear, with my hands on the Testament, that whatever happened I would always be true to him. Mother said he was quite right to make me swear, and that it was a sign of his passion. Mother was  all in his favour from the first and was even fonder of him than I was. Then, when they talked of mar- rying within the week, I began to ask about father; but they both said never to mind about father, but just to tell him afterwards, and mother said she would make it all right with him. I didnt quite like that, Mr. Holmes. It seemed funny that I should ask his leave, as he was only a few years older than me; but I didnt want to do anything on the sly,  so  I wrote to father at Bordeaux, where the company



has its French offices, but the letter came back to me on the very morning of the wedding.
It missed him, then?
Yes, sir; for he had started to England just before it arrived.
Ha! that was unfortunate. Your wedding was arranged, then, for the Friday. Was it to be in church?
Yes, sir, but very quietly. It was to be at St. Saviours, near Kings Cross, and we were to have breakfast afterwards at the St. Pancras Hotel. Hos- mer came for us in a hansom, but as there were two of us he put us both into it and stepped himself into a four-wheeler, which happened to be the only other cab in the street. We got to the church first, and when the four-wheeler drove up we waited for him to step out, but he never did, and when the cabman got down from the box and looked there was no one there! The cabman said that he could not imagine what had become of him, for he had seen him get in with his own eyes. That was last Friday, Mr. Holmes, and I have never seen or heard anything since then to throw any light upon what became of him.
It seems to me that you have been very shame- fully treated, said Holmes.
Oh, no, sir! He was too good and kind to leave me so. Why, all the morning he was saying to me that, whatever happened, I was to be true;  and that even if something quite unforeseen occurred to separate us, I was always to remember that I was pledged to him, and that he would claim his pledge sooner or later.  It seemed strange talk for  a wedding-morning, but what has happened since gives a meaning to it.
Most certainly it does. Your own opinion is, then, that some unforeseen catastrophe has oc- curred to him?
Yes, sir. I believe that he foresaw some danger, or else he would not have talked so. And then I think that what he foresaw happened.
But you have no notion as to what it could have been?
None.
One more question. How did your mother take the matter?
She was angry, and said that I was never to speak of the matter again.
And your father? Did you tell him?
Yes; and he seemed to think, with me, that something had happened, and that I should hear of
Hosmer again. As he said, what interest could any- one have in bringing me to the doors of the church, and then leaving me? Now,  if  he  had  borrowed my money, or if he had married me and got my money settled on him, there might be some reason, but Hosmer was very independent about money and never would look at a shilling of mine. And  yet, what could have happened?  And  why  could he not write?  Oh, it drives me half-mad to think  of it, and I cant sleep a wink at night. She pulled  a little handkerchief out of her muff and began to sob heavily into it.
I shall glance into the case for you, said Holmes, rising, and I have no doubt that we shall reach some definite result. Let the weight of the matter rest upon me now, and do not let your mind dwell upon it further. Above all, try to let Mr. Hos- mer Angel vanish from your memory, as he has done from your life.
Then you dont think Ill see him again? I fear not.
Then what has happened to him?
You will leave that question in my hands. I should like an accurate description of him and any letters of his which you can spare.
I advertised for him in last Saturdays Chron- icle, said she. Here is the slip and here are four letters from him.
Thank you. And your address? No. 31 Lyon Place, Camberwell.
Mr. Angels address you never had, I under- stand. Where is your fathers place of business?
He travels for Westhouse & Marbank, the great claret importers of Fenchurch Street.
Thank you. You have made your statement very clearly. You will leave the papers here, and remember the advice which I have given you. Let the whole incident be a sealed book, and do not allow it to affect your life.
You are very kind, Mr. Holmes, but I cannot do that. I shall be true to Hosmer. He shall find me ready when he comes back.
For all the preposterous hat and the vacuous face, there was something noble in the simple faith of our visitor which compelled our respect. She laid her little bundle of papers upon the table and went her way, with a promise to come again whenever she might be summoned.
Sherlock Holmes sat silent for a few minutes with his fingertips still pressed together, his legs stretched out in front of him, and his gaze directed upward to the ceiling. Then he took down from the rack the old and oily clay pipe, which was to him as a counsellor, and, having lit it, he leaned back in his



chair, with the thick blue cloud-wreaths spinning up from him, and a look of infinite languor in his face.
Quite an interesting study, that maiden, he observed. I found her more interesting than her little problem, which, by the way, is rather a trite one. You will find parallel cases, if you consult my index, in Andover in 77, and there was something of the sort at The Hague last year. Old as is the idea, however, there were one or two details which were new to me. But the maiden herself was most instructive.
You appeared to read a good deal upon her which was quite invisible to me, I remarked.
Not invisible but unnoticed, Watson. You did not know where to look, and so you  missed  all that was important. I can never bring you to re- alise the importance of sleeves, the suggestiveness of thumb-nails, or the great issues that may hang from a boot-lace. Now, what did you gather from that womans appearance? Describe it.
Well, she had a slate-coloured, broad-brimmed straw hat, with a feather of a brickish red. Her jacket was black, with black beads sewn upon it, and a fringe of little black jet ornaments. Her dress was brown, rather darker than coffee colour, with  a little purple plush at the neck and sleeves. Her gloves were greyish and were worn through at the right forefinger. Her boots I didnt observe. She had small round, hanging gold earrings, and a general air of being fairly well-to-do in a vulgar, comfortable, easy-going way.
Sherlock Holmes clapped his hands softly to- gether and chuckled.
Pon my word, Watson, you are coming along wonderfully. You have really done very well in- deed.  It is true that you  have  missed everything  of importance, but you have hit upon the method, and you have  a quick eye  for colour.  Never  trust  to general impressions, my boy, but concentrate yourself upon details. My first glance is always  at  a womans sleeve. In a man it is perhaps better  first to take the knee of the trouser. As you observe, this woman had  plush  upon  her  sleeves,  which is a most useful material for showing traces. The double line a little above the wrist, where the type- writist presses against the table, was beautifully defined. The sewing-machine, of the hand type, leaves a similar mark, but only on the left arm, and on the side of it farthest from the thumb, instead  of being right across the broadest part, as this was. I then glanced at her face, and, observing the dint of a pince-nez at either side of her nose, I ventured
a remark upon short sight and typewriting, which seemed to surprise her.
It surprised me.
But, surely, it was obvious. I was then much surprised and interested on glancing down to ob- serve that, though the boots which she was wearing were not unlike each other, they were really odd ones; the one having a slightly decorated toe-cap, and the other a plain one. One was buttoned only in the two lower buttons out of five, and the other at the first, third, and fifth. Now, when you see that a young lady, otherwise neatly dressed, has come away from home with odd boots, half-buttoned, it is no great deduction to say that she came away in  a hurry.
And what else? I asked, keenly interested, as I always was, by my friends incisive reasoning.
I noted, in passing, that she had written a note before leaving home but after being fully dressed. You observed that her right glove was torn at the forefinger, but you did not apparently see that both glove and finger were stained with violet ink. She had written in a hurry and dipped her pen too deep. It must have been this morning, or the mark would not remain clear upon the finger. All this is amusing, though rather elementary, but I must go back to business, Watson. Would you mind read- ing me the advertised description of Mr. Hosmer Angel?
I held the little printed slip to the light.
Missing, it said, on  the  morning of the fourteenth, a gentleman named Hosmer Angel. About five ft. seven in. in height; strongly built, sallow com- plexion, black hair, a little bald in the centre, bushy, black side-whiskers and moustache; tinted glasses, slight infir- mity of speech.  Was dressed,  when last seen, in black frock-coat faced with silk, black waistcoat, gold Albert chain, and grey Harris tweed trousers, with brown gaiters over elastic-sided boots. Known to have been employed in an office in Leadenhall Street. Anybody bringing

That will do, said Holmes. As to the letters, he continued, glancing over them, they are very commonplace. Absolutely no clue in them to Mr. Angel, save that he quotes Balzac once. There is one remarkable point, however, which will no doubt strike you.
They are typewritten, I remarked.



Not only that, but the signature is typewritten. Look at the neat little Hosmer Angel at the bottom. There is a date, you see, but no superscription ex- cept Leadenhall Street, which is rather vague. The point about the signature is very suggestivein fact, we may call it conclusive.
Of what?
My dear fellow, is it possible you do not see how strongly it bears upon the case?
I cannot say that I do unless it were that he wished to be able to deny his signature if an action for breach of promise were instituted.
No, that was not the point. However, I shall write two letters, which should settle the matter. One is to a firm in the City, the other is to the young ladys stepfather, Mr. Windibank, asking him whether he could meet us here at six oclock tomorrow evening. It is just as well that we should do business with the male relatives. And now, Doc- tor, we can do nothing until the answers to those letters come, so we may put our little problem upon the shelf for the interim.
I had had so many reasons to believe in my friends subtle powers of reasoning and extraordi- nary energy in action that I felt that he must have some solid grounds for the assured and easy de- meanour with which he treated the singular mys- tery which he had been called upon to fathom. Once only had I known  him  to  fail,  in  the  case of the King of Bohemia and of the Irene Adler photograph; but when I looked back to the weird business of the Sign of Four, and the extraordinary circumstances connected with the Study in Scarlet, I felt that it would be a strange tangle indeed which he could not unravel.
I left him then, still puffing at his black clay pipe, with the conviction that when I came again on the next evening I would find that he held in his hands all the clues which would lead up to the identity of the disappearing bridegroom of Miss Mary Sutherland.
A professional case of great gravity was engag- ing my own attention at the time, and the whole of next day I was busy at the bedside of the sufferer.  It was not until close upon six oclock that I found myself free and was able to spring into a hansom and drive to Baker Street, half afraid that I might be too late to assist at the denouement of the little mystery. I found Sherlock Holmes alone, however, half asleep, with his long, thin form curled up in the recesses of his armchair.  A formidable array  of bottles and test-tubes, with the pungent cleanly smell of hydrochloric acid, told me that he had
spent his day in the chemical work which was so dear to him.
Well, have you solved it? I asked as I entered. Yes. It was the bisulphate of baryta.
No, no, the mystery! I cried.
Oh, that! I thought of the salt that I have been working upon. There was never  any  mystery in the matter, though, as I said yesterday, some of the details are of interest. The only drawback is that there is no law, I fear, that can touch the scoundrel. Who was he, then, and what was his object in
deserting Miss Sutherland?
The question was hardly out of my mouth, and Holmes had not yet opened his lips to reply, when we heard a heavy footfall in the passage and a tap at the door.
This is the girls stepfather, Mr. James Windibank, said Holmes. He has written to me to say that he would be here at six. Come in!
The man who entered was a sturdy, middle- sized fellow, some thirty years of age, clean-shaven, and sallow-skinned, with a bland, insinuating man- ner, and a pair of wonderfully sharp and penetrat- ing grey eyes. He shot a questioning glance at each of us, placed his shiny top-hat upon the sideboard, and with a slight bow sidled down into the nearest chair.
Good-evening, Mr. James Windibank, said Holmes. I think that this typewritten letter is from you, in which you made an appointment with me for six oclock?
Yes, sir. I am afraid that I am a little late, but I am not quite my own master, you know. I am sorry that Miss Sutherland has troubled you about this little matter, for I think it is far better not to wash linen of the sort in public. It was quite against my wishes that she came, but she is a very excitable, impulsive girl, as you may  have  noticed,  and she is not easily controlled when she has made up her mind on a point.  Of course,  I did not mind you    so much, as you are not connected with the offi- cial police, but it is not pleasant to have a family misfortune like this noised abroad. Besides, it is a useless expense, for how could you possibly find this Hosmer Angel?
On the contrary, said Holmes quietly; I have every reason to believe that I will succeed in dis- covering Mr. Hosmer Angel.
Mr. Windibank gave a violent start and dropped his gloves. I am delighted to hear it, he said.
It is a curious thing, remarked Holmes, that a typewriter has really quite as much individuality as a mans handwriting. Unless they are quite new, no two of them write exactly alike. Some letters get



more worn than others, and some wear only on one side. Now, you remark in this note of yours, Mr. Windibank, that in every case there is some little slurring over of the e, and a slight defect in the tail of the r. There are fourteen other characteristics, but those are the more obvious.
We do all our correspondence with this ma- chine at the office, and no doubt it is a little worn, our visitor answered, glancing keenly at Holmes with his bright little eyes.
And now I will show you what is really a very interesting study, Mr. Windibank, Holmes contin- ued. I think of writing another little monograph some of these days on the typewriter and its rela- tion to crime. It is a subject to which I have devoted some little attention. I have here four letters which purport to come from the missing man. They are all typewritten. In each case, not only are the es slurred and the rs tailless, but you will observe, if you care to use my magnifying lens, that the four- teen other characteristics to which I have alluded are there as well.
Mr. Windibank sprang out of his chair and picked up his hat. I cannot waste time over this sort of fantastic talk, Mr. Holmes, he said. If you can catch the man, catch him, and let me know when you have done it.
Certainly, said Holmes, stepping over and turning the key in the door. I let you know, then, that I have caught him!
What! where? shouted Mr. Windibank, turn- ing white to his lips and glancing about him like a rat in a trap.
Oh, it wont doreally it wont, said Holmes suavely. There is no possible getting out of it, Mr. Windibank. It is quite too transparent,  and it was a very bad compliment when you said that it was impossible for me to solve so simple a question. Thats right! Sit down and let us talk it over.
Our visitor collapsed into a chair, with a ghastly face and a glitter of moisture on his brow. Itits not actionable, he stammered.
I am very much afraid that it is not. But be- tween ourselves, Windibank, it was as cruel and selfish and heartless a trick in a petty way as ever came before me. Now, let me just run over the course of events, and you will contradict me if I go wrong.
The man sat huddled up in his chair, with his head sunk upon his breast, like one who is utterly crushed. Holmes stuck his feet up on the corner of the mantelpiece and, leaning back with his hands
in his pockets, began talking, rather to himself, as it seemed, than to us.
The man married a woman very much older than himself for her money, said he, and he en- joyed the use of the money of the daughter as long as she lived with them. It was a considerable sum, for people in their position, and the loss of it would have made a serious difference. It was worth an effort to preserve it. The daughter was of a good, amiable disposition, but affectionate and warm- hearted in her ways, so that it was evident  that with her fair personal advantages, and her little income, she would not be allowed to remain single long. Now her marriage would mean, of course,  the loss of a hundred a year, so what does her stepfather do to prevent it? He takes the obvious course of keeping her at home and forbidding her to seek the company of people of her own age. But soon he found that that would not answer forever. She became restive, insisted upon her rights, and finally announced her positive intention of going  to a certain ball. What does her clever stepfather do then? He conceives an idea more creditable to his head than to his heart. With the connivance and assistance of his wife he disguised himself, cov- ered those keen eyes with tinted glasses, masked the face with a moustache and a pair of bushy whiskers, sunk that clear voice into an insinuating whisper, and doubly secure on account of the girls short sight, he appears as Mr. Hosmer Angel, and keeps off other lovers by making love himself.
It was only a joke at first, groaned our visitor. We never thought that she would have been so carried away.
Very likely not. However that may be, the young lady was very decidedly carried away, and, having quite made up her mind that her stepfather was in France, the suspicion of treachery never for an instant entered her mind. She was flattered by the gentlemans attentions, and the effect was in- creased by the loudly expressed admiration of her mother. Then Mr. Angel began to call, for it was obvious that the matter should be pushed as far   as it would go if a real effect were to be produced. There were meetings, and an engagement, which would finally secure the girls affections from turn- ing towards anyone else. But the deception could not be kept up forever. These pretended journeys to France were rather cumbrous. The thing to do was clearly to bring the business to an end in such a dramatic manner that it would leave a perma- nent impression upon the young ladys mind and prevent her from looking upon any  other  suitor for some time to come. Hence those vows of fi- delity exacted upon a Testament, and hence also



the allusions to a possibility of something happen- ing on the very morning of the wedding. James Windibank wished Miss Sutherland to be so bound to Hosmer Angel, and so uncertain as to his fate, that for ten years to come, at any rate, she would not listen to another man. As far as the church door he brought her, and then, as he could go no farther, he conveniently vanished away by the old trick of stepping in at one door of a four-wheeler and out at the other. I think that was the chain of events, Mr. Windibank!
Our visitor had recovered something of his as- surance while Holmes had been talking, and he rose from his chair now with a cold sneer upon his pale face.
It may be so, or it may not, Mr. Holmes, said he, but if you are so very sharp you ought to be sharp enough to know that it is you who are break- ing the law now, and not me. I have done nothing actionable from the first, but as long as you keep that door locked you lay yourself open to an action for assault and illegal constraint.
The law cannot, as you say, touch you, said Holmes, unlocking and throwing open the door, yet there never was a man who deserved punish- ment more. If the young lady has a brother or a friend, he ought to lay a whip across your shoul- ders. By Jove! he continued, flushing up at the sight of the bitter sneer upon the mans face,  it    is not part of my duties to my client, but heres a hunting crop handy, and I think I shall just treat myself to He took two swift steps to the whip, but before he could grasp it there was a wild clat- ter of steps upon the stairs, the heavy hall door banged, and from the window we could see Mr. James Windibank running at the top of his speed down the road.
Theres a cold-blooded scoundrel! said Holmes, laughing, as he threw himself down into his chair once more. That fellow will rise from crime to crime until he does something very bad, and ends on a gallows. The case has, in some respects, been not entirely devoid of interest.
I cannot now entirely see all the steps of your reasoning, I remarked.
Well, of course it was obvious from the first that this Mr. Hosmer Angel must have some strong object for his curious conduct, and it was equally clear that the only man who really profited by the incident, as far as we could see, was the stepfather. Then the fact that the two men were never together, but that the one always appeared when the other was away, was suggestive. So were the tinted spec- tacles and the curious voice, which both hinted at a disguise, as did the bushy whiskers. My suspicions were all confirmed by his peculiar action in type- writing his signature, which, of course, inferred that his handwriting was so familiar to her that  she would recognise even the smallest sample of it. You see all these isolated facts, together with many minor ones, all pointed in the same direction.
And how did you verify them?
Having once spotted my man, it was easy to get corroboration. I knew the firm for which this man worked. Having taken the printed description, I eliminated everything from it which could be the result of a disguisethe whiskers, the glasses, the voice, and I sent it to the firm, with a request that they would inform me whether it answered to the description of any of their travellers. I had already noticed the peculiarities of the typewriter, and I wrote to the man himself at his business address asking him if he would come here. As I expected, his reply was typewritten and revealed the same trivial but characteristic defects. The same post brought me a letter from Westhouse & Marbank, of Fenchurch Street, to say that the description tallied in every respect with that of their employee, James Windibank. Voila`  tout!
And Miss Sutherland?
If I tell her she will not believe me. You may remember the old Persian saying, There is dan- ger for him who taketh the tiger cub, and danger also for whoso snatches a delusion from a woman. There is as much sense in Hafiz as in Horace, and as much knowledge of the world.



























The Boscombe Valley Mystery





W
e were seated at breakfast one morning, my wife and I, when the maid brought in a telegram. It was from Sherlock Holmes and ran in this way:

Have you a couple of days to spare? Have just been wired for from the west of England in connection with Boscombe Valley tragedy. Shall be glad if you will come with me. Air and scenery perfect. Leave Paddington by the 11.15.

What do you say, dear? said my wife, looking across at me. Will you go?
I really dont know what to say. I have a fairly long list at present.
Oh, Anstruther would do your work for you. You have been looking a little pale lately. I think that the change would do you good, and you are al- ways so interested in Mr. Sherlock Holmes cases.
I should be ungrateful if I were not, seeing what I gained through one of them, I answered. But if I am to go, I must pack at once, for I have only half an hour.
My experience of camp life in Afghanistan had at least had the effect of making me a prompt and ready traveller. My wants  were  few  and  simple, so that in less than the time stated I was in a cab with my valise, rattling away to Paddington Station. Sherlock Holmes was pacing up and down the plat- form, his tall, gaunt figure made even gaunter and taller by his long grey travelling-cloak and close- fitting cloth cap.
It is really very good of you to come, Watson, said he. It makes a considerable  difference  to me, having someone with me on whom I can thor- oughly rely. Local aid is always either worthless or else biassed. If you will keep the two corner seats I shall get the tickets.
We had the carriage to ourselves save for an im- mense litter of papers which Holmes had brought with him. Among these he rummaged and read, with intervals of note-taking and of meditation, un- til we were past Reading. Then he suddenly rolled them all into a gigantic ball and tossed them up onto the rack.
Have you heard anything of the case? he asked.
Not a word. I have not seen a paper for some days.
The London press has not had very full ac- counts. I have just been looking through all the
recent papers in order to master the particulars. It seems, from what I gather, to be one of those simple cases which are so extremely difficult.
That sounds a little paradoxical.
But it is profoundly true. Singularity is almost invariably a clue. The more featureless and com- monplace a crime is, the more difficult it is to bring it home. In this case, however, they have estab- lished a very serious case against the son of the murdered man.
It is a murder, then?
Well, it is conjectured to be so. I shall take nothing for granted until I have  the opportunity  of looking personally into it. I will explain  the state of things to you, as far as I have been able to understand it, in a very few words.
Boscombe Valley is a country district not very far from Ross, in Herefordshire. The largest landed proprietor in that part is a Mr. John Turner, who made his money in Australia and returned some years ago to the old country. One of the farms which he held, that of Hatherley, was let to Mr. Charles McCarthy, who was also an ex-Australian. The men had known each other in the colonies, so that it was not unnatural that when they came to settle down they should do so as near each other  as possible. Turner was apparently the richer man, so McCarthy became his tenant but still remained, it seems, upon terms of perfect equality, as they were frequently together. McCarthy had one son, a lad of eighteen, and Turner had an only daughter of the same age, but neither of them had wives living. They  appear  to  have  avoided  the  society of the neighbouring English families and to have led retired lives, though both the McCarthys were fond of sport and were frequently seen at the race- meetings of the neighbourhood. McCarthy kept two servantsa man and a girl. Turner had a con- siderable household, some half-dozen at the least. That is as much as I have been able to gather about the families. Now for the facts.
On June 3rd, that is, on Monday last, McCarthy left his house at Hatherley about three in the af- ternoon and walked down to the Boscombe Pool, which is a small lake formed by the spreading out of the stream which runs down the Boscombe Val- ley. He had been out with his serving-man in the morning at Ross, and he had told the man that he must hurry, as he had an appointment of impor- tance to keep at three. From that appointment he never came back alive.
From Hatherley Farm-house to the Boscombe Pool is a quarter of a mile, and two people saw



him as he passed over this ground.  One was  an  old woman, whose name is not mentioned,  and the other was William Crowder, a game-keeper in the employ of Mr. Turner. Both these witnesses depose that Mr. McCarthy was walking alone. The game-keeper adds that within a few minutes of his seeing Mr. McCarthy pass he had seen his son, Mr. James McCarthy, going the same way with a gun under his arm. To the best of his belief, the father was actually in sight at the time, and the son was following him. He thought no more of the matter until he heard in the evening of the tragedy that had occurred.
The two McCarthys were seen after the time when William Crowder, the game-keeper, lost sight of them. The Boscombe Pool is thickly wooded round, with just a fringe of grass and of reeds round the edge. A girl of fourteen, Patience Moran, who is the daughter of the lodge-keeper of the Boscombe Valley estate, was in one of the woods picking flowers. She states that while she was there she saw, at the border of the wood and close by the lake, Mr. McCarthy and his son, and that they ap- peared to be having a violent quarrel. She heard Mr. McCarthy the elder using very strong language to his son, and she saw the latter raise up his hand as if to strike his father. She was so frightened by their violence that she ran away and told her mother when she reached home that she had left the two McCarthys quarrelling near Boscombe Pool, and that she was afraid that they were going to fight. She had hardly said the words when young Mr. McCarthy came running up to the lodge to say that he had found his  father  dead  in  the  wood,  and to ask for the help of the lodge-keeper. He was much excited, without either his gun or his hat, and his right hand and sleeve were observed to be stained with fresh blood. On following him they found the dead body stretched out upon the grass beside the pool. The head had been beaten in by repeated blows of some heavy and blunt weapon. The injuries were such as might very well have been inflicted by the butt-end of his sons gun, which was  found lying on the grass within a few paces    of the body. Under these circumstances the young man was instantly arrested, and a verdict of wilful murder having been returned at the inquest on Tuesday, he was on Wednesday brought before the magistrates at Ross, who have referred the case to the next Assizes. Those are the main facts of the case as they came out before the coroner and the police-court.
I could hardly imagine a more damning case, I remarked. If ever circumstantial evidence pointed to a criminal it does so here.
Circumstantial evidence is a very tricky thing, answered Holmes thoughtfully. It may seem to point very straight to one thing, but if you shift your own point of view a little, you may find it pointing in an equally  uncompromising  manner to something entirely different. It must be con- fessed, however, that the case looks exceedingly grave against the young man, and it is very possi- ble that he is indeed the culprit. There are several people in the neighbourhood, however, and among them Miss Turner, the daughter of the neighbour- ing landowner, who believe in his innocence, and who have retained Lestrade, whom you may recol- lect in connection with the Study in Scarlet, to work out the case in his interest. Lestrade, being rather puzzled,  has referred the case to me,  and hence    it is that two middle-aged gentlemen are flying westward at fifty miles an hour instead of quietly digesting their breakfasts at home.
I am afraid, said I, that the facts are so obvi- ous that you will find little credit to be gained out of this case.
There is nothing more deceptive than an ob- vious fact, he answered, laughing. Besides, we may chance to hit upon some other obvious facts which may have been by no means obvious to Mr. Lestrade. You know me too well  to  think  that  I am boasting when I say that I shall either confirm or destroy his theory by means which he is quite incapable of employing, or even of understanding. To take the first example to hand, I very clearly perceive that in your bedroom the window is upon the right-hand side, and yet I question whether Mr. Lestrade would have noted even so self-evident a thing as that.
How on earth
My dear fellow, I know you well. I know the military neatness which characterises you. You shave every morning, and in this season you shave by the sunlight; but since your shaving is less and less complete as we get farther back on the left side, until it becomes positively slovenly as we get round the angle of the jaw, it is surely very clear that that side is less illuminated than the other. I could not imagine a man of your habits looking at himself   in an equal light and being satisfied with such a result. I only quote this as a trivial example of observation and inference. Therein lies my metier, and it is just possible that it may be of some service in the investigation which lies before us. There are one or two minor points which were brought out  in the inquest, and which are worth considering.
What are they?



It appears that his arrest did not take place at once, but after the return to Hatherley Farm. On the inspector of constabulary informing him that he was a prisoner, he remarked that he was not surprised to hear it, and that it was no more than his deserts. This observation of his had the natural effect of removing any traces of doubt which might have remained in the minds of the coroners jury.
It was a confession, I ejaculated.
No, for it was followed by a protestation of innocence.
Coming on the top of such a damning series of events, it was at least a most suspicious remark.
On the contrary, said Holmes, it is the bright- est rift which I can at present see in the clouds. However innocent he might be, he could not be such an absolute imbecile as not to see that the circumstances were very black against him. Had  he appeared surprised at his own arrest, or feigned indignation at it, I should have looked upon it as highly suspicious, because such surprise or anger would not be natural under the circumstances, and yet might appear to be the best policy to a scheming man. His frank acceptance of the situation marks him as either an innocent man, or else as a man of considerable self-restraint and firmness. As to his remark about his deserts, it was also not unnatural if you consider that he stood beside the dead body of his father, and that there is no doubt that he had that very day so far forgotten his filial duty as to bandy words with him, and even, according to the little girl whose evidence is so important, to raise his hand as if to strike him. The self-reproach and contrition which are displayed in his remark appear to me to be the signs of a healthy mind rather than of a guilty one.
I shook my head. Many men have been hanged on far slighter evidence, I remarked.
So they have. And many men have been wrongfully hanged.
What is the young mans own account of the matter?
It is, I am afraid, not very encouraging to his supporters, though there are one or two points in it which are suggestive. You will find it here, and may read it for yourself.
He picked out from his bundle a copy of the local Herefordshire paper, and having turned down the sheet he pointed out the paragraph in which the unfortunate young man had given his own statement of what had occurred. I settled myself down in the corner of the carriage and read it very carefully. It ran in this way:
Mr. James McCarthy, the only son of the deceased, was then called and gave evidence as follows: I had been away from home for three days at Bristol, and had only just re- turned upon the morning of last Monday, the 3rd. My father was absent from home at the time of my arrival, and I was informed by the maid that he had driven over to Ross with John Cobb, the groom. Shortly after my return I heard the wheels of his trap   in the yard, and, looking out of my win- dow, I saw him get out and walk rapidly out of the yard, though I was not aware in which direction he was going. I then took my gun and strolled out in the direction    of the Boscombe Pool, with the intention  of visiting the rabbit warren which is upon the other side. On my way I saw William Crowder, the game-keeper, as he had stated in his evidence; but he is mistaken in think- ing that I was following my father. I had  no idea that he was in front of me. When about a hundred yards from the pool I heard a cry of Cooee! which was a usual signal between my father and myself. I then hur- ried forward, and found him standing by the pool. He appeared to be much surprised at seeing me and asked me rather roughly what I was doing there. A conversation en- sued which led to high words and almost to blows, for my father was a man of a very violent temper. Seeing that his passion was becoming ungovernable, I left him and re- turned towards Hatherley Farm. I had not gone more than 150 yards, however, when I heard a hideous outcry behind me, which caused me to run back again. I found my father expiring upon the ground, with his head terribly injured. I dropped my gun and held him in my arms, but he almost instantly expired. I knelt beside him for some minutes, and then made my way to Mr. Turners lodge-keeper, his house being the nearest, to ask for assistance. I saw no one near my father when I returned,  and   I have no idea how he came by his injuries. He was not a popular man, being somewhat cold and forbidding in his manners, but he had, as far as I know, no active enemies. I know nothing further of the matter.
The Coroner: Did your father make any statement to you before he died?
Witness: He mumbled a few words, but I could only catch some allusion to a rat. The Coroner: What did you understand



by that?
Witness: It conveyed no meaning to me. I thought that he was delirious.
The Coroner: What was the point upon which you and your father had this final quarrel?
Witness: I should prefer not to answer. The Coroner: I am afraid that I must press it.
Witness: It is really impossible for me to tell you. I can assure you that it has noth- ing to do with the sad tragedy which fol- lowed.
The Coroner: That is for the court to de- cide. I need not point  out  to  you  that your refusal to answer will prejudice your case considerably in any future proceedings which may arise.
Witness: I must still refuse.
The Coroner: I understand that the cry of Cooee was a common signal between you and your father?
Witness: It was.
The Coroner: How was it, then, that he uttered it before he saw you, and before he even knew that you had returned from Bris- tol?
Witness (with considerable confusion): I do not know.
A Juryman: Did you see nothing which aroused your suspicions when you returned on hearing the cry and found your father fatally injured?
Witness: Nothing definite.
The Coroner: What do you mean? Witness: I was so disturbed and excited as I rushed out into the open, that I could think of nothing except of my father. Yet I have a vague impression that as I ran for- ward something lay upon the ground to the left of me. It seemed to me to be something grey in colour, a coat of some sort, or a
plaid perhaps. When I rose from my father I looked round for it, but it was gone.
 Do you mean that it disappeared before you went for help?
 Yes, it was gone.
 You cannot say what it was?
 No, I had a feeling something was there.  How far from the body?
 A dozen yards or so.
 And how far from the edge of the wood?  About the same.
 Then if it was removed it was while you were within a dozen yards of it?
 Yes, but with my back towards it.
This concluded the examination of the witness.
I see, said I as I glanced down the column, that the coroner in his concluding remarks was rather severe upon young McCarthy. He calls attention, and with reason, to the discrepancy about his father having signalled to him before seeing him, also to his refusal to give details of his conversation with his father, and his singular account of his fathers dying words. They are all, as he remarks, very much against the son.
Holmes laughed softly to himself and stretched himself out upon the cushioned seat. Both  you and the coroner have been at some pains, said he, to single out the very strongest points in the young mans favour. Dont you see that you  alternately give him credit for having too much imagination and too little? Too little, if he could not invent a cause of quarrel which would give him the sympa- thy of the jury; too much, if he evolved from his own  inner  consciousness  anything  so  outre  as  a dying reference to a rat, and the incident of the van- ishing cloth. No, sir, I shall approach this case from the point of view that what this young man says is true, and we shall see whither that hypothesis will lead us. And now here is my pocket Petrarch, and not another word shall I say of this case until we  are on the scene of action. We lunch at Swindon, and I see that we shall be there in twenty minutes.
It was nearly four oclock when we at last, after passing through the beautiful Stroud Valley, and over the broad gleaming Severn, found ourselves  at the pretty little country-town of Ross. A lean, ferret-like man, furtive and sly-looking, was wait- ing for us upon the platform. In spite of the light brown dustcoat and leather-leggings which he wore in deference to his rustic surroundings, I had no difficulty in recognising Lestrade, of Scotland Yard. With him we drove to the Hereford Arms where a room had already been engaged for us.
I have ordered a carriage, said Lestrade as we sat over a cup of tea. I knew your energetic nature, and that you would not be happy until you had been on the scene of the crime.
It was very nice and complimentary of you, Holmes answered. It is entirely a question of baro- metric pressure.
Lestrade looked startled. I do not quite follow, he said.
How is the glass? Twenty-nine, I see. No wind, and not a cloud in the sky. I have a caseful of



cigarettes here which need smoking, and the sofa is very much superior to the usual country hotel abomination. I do not think that it is probable that I shall use the carriage to-night.
Lestrade laughed indulgently. You have, no doubt, already formed your conclusions from the newspapers, he said. The case is as plain as a pikestaff, and the more one goes into it the plainer it becomes. Still, of course, one cant refuse a lady, and such a very positive one, too.  She has heard  of you, and would have your opinion, though I repeatedly told her that there was nothing which you could do which I had not already done. Why, bless my soul! here is her carriage at the door.
He had hardly spoken before there rushed into the room one of the most lovely young women that I have ever seen in my life. Her violet eyes shining, her lips parted, a pink flush upon her cheeks, all thought of her natural reserve lost in her overpow- ering excitement and concern.
Oh, Mr. Sherlock Holmes! she cried, glanc- ing from one to the other of us, and finally, with a womans quick intuition, fastening upon my com- panion, I am so glad that you have come. I have driven down to tell you so. I know that James didnt do it. I know it, and I want you  to start  upon your work knowing it, too. Never let yourself doubt upon that point. We have known each other since we were little children, and I know his faults as no one else does; but he is too tender-hearted to hurt a fly. Such a charge is absurd to anyone who really knows him.
I hope we may clear him, Miss Turner, said Sherlock Holmes. You may rely upon my doing all that I can.
But you have read the evidence. You have formed some conclusion? Do you not see some loophole, some flaw? Do you not yourself think that he is innocent?
I think that it is very probable.
There, now! she cried, throwing back her head and looking defiantly at Lestrade. You hear! He gives me hopes.
Lestrade shrugged his shoulders. I am afraid that my colleague has been a little quick in forming his conclusions, he said.
But he is right. Oh! I know that he is right. James never did it. And about his quarrel with his father, I am sure that the reason why he would not speak about it to the coroner was because I was concerned in it.
In what way? asked Holmes.
It is no time for me to hide anything. James and his father had many disagreements about me. Mr. McCarthy was very anxious that there should be a marriage between us. James and I have al- ways loved each other as brother and sister; but of course he is young and has seen very little of life yet, andandwell, he naturally did not wish to do anything like that yet. So there were quarrels, and this, I am sure, was one of them.
And your father? asked Holmes. Was he in favour of such a union?
No, he was averse to it also. No one but Mr. Mc- Carthy was in favour of it. A quick blush passed over her fresh young face as Holmes shot one of  his keen, questioning glances at her.
Thank you for this information, said he. May I see your father if I call to-morrow?
I am afraid the doctor wont allow it. The doctor?
Yes, have you not heard? Poor father has never been strong for years back, but this has broken him down completely.  He has taken to his bed,  and  Dr. Willows says that he is a wreck and that his nervous system is shattered. Mr. McCarthy was the only man alive who had known dad in the old days in Victoria.
Ha! In Victoria! That is important. Yes, at the mines.
Quite so; at the gold-mines, where, as I under- stand, Mr. Turner made his money.
Yes, certainly.
Thank you, Miss Turner. You have been of material assistance to me.
You will tell me if you have any news to- morrow. No doubt you will  go  to  the  prison  to see James. Oh, if you do, Mr. Holmes, do tell him that I know him to be innocent.
I will, Miss Turner.
I must go home now, for dad is very ill, and he misses me so if I leave him. Good-bye, and God help you in your undertaking. She hurried from the room as impulsively as she had entered, and we heard the wheels of her carriage rattle off down the street.
I am ashamed of you, Holmes, said Lestrade with dignity after a few minutes silence. Why should you raise up hopes which you are bound to disappoint? I am not over-tender of heart, but I call it cruel.
I think that I see my way to clearing James McCarthy, said Holmes. Have you an order to see him in prison?
Yes, but only for you and me.



Then I shall reconsider my resolution about going out. We have still time to take a train to Hereford and see him to-night?
Ample.
Then let us do so. Watson, I fear that you will find it very slow, but I shall only be away a couple of hours.
I walked down to the station with them, and then wandered through the streets of the little town, finally returning to the hotel, where  I  lay  upon the sofa and tried to interest myself in a yellow- backed novel. The puny plot of the story was so thin, however, when compared to the deep mys- tery through which we were groping, and I found my attention wander so continually from the ac- tion to the fact, that I at last flung it across the room and gave myself up entirely to a considera- tion of the events of the day. Supposing that this unhappy young mans story were absolutely true, then what hellish thing, what absolutely unforeseen and extraordinary calamity could have occurred be- tween the time when he parted from his father, and the moment when, drawn back by his screams, he rushed into the glade? It was something terrible and deadly. What could it be? Might not the na- ture of the injuries reveal something to my medical instincts? I rang the bell and called for the weekly county paper, which contained a verbatim account of the inquest. In the surgeons deposition it was stated that the posterior third of the left parietal bone and the left half of the occipital bone had been shattered by  a heavy blow from a blunt weapon.     I marked the spot upon my own head.  Clearly such a blow must have been struck from behind. That was to some extent in favour of the accused, as when seen quarrelling he was face to face with his father. Still,  it did not go for very much,  for  the older man might have turned his back before the blow fell. Still, it might be worth while to call Holmes attention to it. Then there was the peculiar dying reference to a rat. What could that mean? It could not be delirium. A man dying from a sudden blow does not commonly become delirious. No, it was  more likely to be an attempt to explain how  he met his fate. But what could it indicate? I cud- gelled my brains to find some possible explanation. And then the incident of the grey cloth seen by young McCarthy. If that were true the murderer must have dropped some part of his dress, pre- sumably his overcoat, in his flight, and must have had the hardihood to return and to carry it away   at the instant when the son was kneeling with his back turned not a dozen paces off.  What a tissue  of mysteries and improbabilities the whole thing
was! I did not wonder at Lestrades opinion, and yet I had so much faith in Sherlock Holmes insight that I could not lose hope as long as every fresh fact seemed to strengthen his conviction of young McCarthys innocence.
It was late before Sherlock Holmes returned. He came back alone, for Lestrade was staying in lodgings in the town.
The glass still keeps very high, he remarked as he sat down. It is of importance that it should not rain before we are able to go over the ground. On the other hand, a man should be at his very best and keenest for such nice work as that, and I did not wish to do it when fagged by a long journey. I have seen young McCarthy.
And what did you learn from him? Nothing.
Could he throw no light?
None at all. I was inclined to think  at  one time that he knew who had done it and was screen- ing him or her,  but I am convinced now that he     is as puzzled as everyone else. He is not a very quick-witted youth, though comely to look at and,  I should think, sound at heart.
I cannot admire his taste, I remarked, if it is indeed a fact that he was averse to a marriage with so charming a young lady as this Miss Turner.
Ah, thereby hangs a rather painful tale. This fellow is madly, insanely, in love with her, but some two years ago, when he was only a lad, and before he really knew her, for she had been away five years at a boarding-school, what does the idiot do but  get into the clutches of a barmaid in Bristol and marry her at a registry office? No one knows a word of the matter, but you can imagine how mad- dening it must be to him to be upbraided for not doing what he would give his very eyes to do, but what he knows to be absolutely impossible. It was sheer frenzy of this sort which made him throw   his hands up into the air when his father, at their last interview, was goading him on to propose to Miss Turner. On the other hand, he had no means of supporting himself, and his father, who was by all accounts a very hard man, would have thrown him over utterly had he known the truth. It was with his barmaid wife that he had spent the last three days in Bristol, and his father did not know where he was. Mark that point. It is of importance. Good has come out of evil, however, for the bar- maid, finding from the papers that he is in serious trouble and likely to be hanged, has thrown him over utterly and has written to him to say that she has a husband already in the Bermuda Dockyard, so that there is really no tie between them. I think



that that bit of news has consoled young McCarthy for all that he has suffered.
But if he is innocent, who has done it?
Ah! who? I would call your attention very par- ticularly to two points. One is that the murdered man had an appointment with someone at the pool, and that the someone could not have been his son, for his son was away,  and he did not know when  he would return. The second is that the murdered man was heard to cry Cooee! before he knew that his son had returned. Those are the crucial points upon which the case depends. And now let us talk about George Meredith, if you please, and we shall leave all minor matters until to-morrow.
There was no rain, as Holmes had foretold, and the morning broke bright and cloudless. At nine oclock Lestrade called for us with the carriage, and we set off for Hatherley Farm and the Boscombe Pool.
There is serious news this morning, Lestrade observed. It is said that Mr. Turner, of the Hall, is so ill that his life is despaired of.
An elderly man, I presume? said Holmes. About sixty; but his constitution has been shat-
tered by  his life abroad, and he has been in  failing
health for some time. This business has had a very bad effect upon him. He was an old friend of Mc- Carthys, and, I may add, a great benefactor to him, for I have learned that he gave him Hatherley Farm rent free.
Indeed! That is interesting, said Holmes. Oh,   yes!    In  a  hundred  other  ways   he has
helped him.  Everybody about here speaks of his
kindness to him.
Really! Does it not strike you as a little singular that this McCarthy, who appears to have had little of his own, and to have been under such obligations to Turner, should still talk of marrying his son to Turners daughter, who is, presumably, heiress to the estate, and that in such a very cocksure manner, as if it were  merely a case of a proposal and all  else would follow? It is the more strange, since we know that Turner himself was averse to the idea. The daughter told us as much. Do you not deduce something from that?
We have got to the deductions and the infer- ences, said Lestrade, winking at me. I find  it hard enough to tackle facts, Holmes, without flying away after theories and fancies.
You are right, said Holmes demurely; you  do find it very hard to tackle the facts.
Anyhow, I have grasped one fact which you seem to find it difficult to get hold of, replied Lestrade with some warmth.
And that is
That McCarthy senior met his death from Mc- Carthy junior and that all theories to the contrary are the merest moonshine.
Well, moonshine is a brighter thing than fog, said Holmes, laughing. But I am very much mis- taken if this is not Hatherley Farm upon the left.
Yes, that is it. It was a widespread, comfortable-looking building, two-storied, slate- roofed, with great yellow blotches of lichen upon the grey walls. The drawn blinds and the smoke- less chimneys, however, gave it a stricken look, as though the weight of this horror still lay heavy upon it. We called at the door, when the maid, at Holmes request, showed us the boots which her master wore at the time of his death, and also a pair of the sons, though not the pair which he had then had. Having measured these very carefully from seven or eight different points, Holmes de- sired to be led to the court-yard, from which we all followed the winding track which led to Boscombe Pool.
Sherlock Holmes was transformed when he was hot upon such a scent as this. Men who had only known the quiet thinker and logician of Baker Street would have failed to  recognise  him.  His face flushed and darkened. His brows were drawn into two hard black lines, while his eyes shone out from beneath them with a steely glitter. His face was bent downward, his shoulders bowed, his lips compressed, and the veins stood out like whipcord in his long, sinewy neck. His nostrils seemed to dilate with a purely animal lust for the chase, and his mind was so absolutely concentrated upon the matter before him that a question or remark fell unheeded upon his ears, or, at the most, only pro- voked a quick, impatient snarl in  reply.  Swiftly and silently he made his way along the track which ran through the meadows, and so by way of the woods to the Boscombe Pool. It was damp, marshy ground, as is all that district, and there were marks of many feet, both upon the path and amid the short grass which bounded it on either side. Some- times Holmes would hurry on, sometimes stop dead, and once he made quite a little detour into the meadow. Lestrade and I walked behind him, the detective indifferent and contemptuous, while I watched my friend with the interest which sprang from the conviction that every one of his actions was directed towards a definite end.



The Boscombe Pool, which is a little reed-girt sheet of water some fifty yards across, is situated at the boundary between the Hatherley Farm and the private park of the wealthy Mr. Turner. Above the woods which lined it upon the farther side we could see the red, jutting pinnacles which marked the site of the rich landowners dwelling. On the Hatherley side of the pool the woods grew very thick, and there was a narrow belt of sodden grass twenty paces across between the edge of the trees and the reeds which lined the lake. Lestrade  showed  us the exact spot at which the body had been found, and, indeed, so moist was the ground, that I could plainly see the traces which had been left by the fall of the stricken man. To Holmes, as I could see by his eager face and peering eyes, very many other things were to be read upon the trampled grass.  He ran round, like a dog who is picking up a scent, and then turned upon my companion.
What did you go into the pool for? he asked.
I fished about with a rake. I thought there might be some weapon or other trace. But how on earth
Oh, tut, tut! I have no time! That left foot of yours with its inward twist is all over the place. A mole could trace it, and there it vanishes among the reeds. Oh, how simple it would all have been had I been here before they came like a herd of buffalo and wallowed all over  it.  Here  is  where the party with the lodge-keeper came, and they have covered all tracks for six or eight feet round the body. But here are three separate tracks of the same feet. He drew out a lens and lay down upon his waterproof to have a better  view,  talking  all the time rather to himself than to us. These are young McCarthys feet. Twice he was walking, and once he ran swiftly, so that the soles are deeply marked and the heels hardly visible. That bears  out his story. He ran when he saw his father on the ground. Then here are the fathers feet as he paced up and down. What is this, then? It is the butt-end of the gun as the son stood listening. And this? Ha, ha! What have we here? Tiptoes! tiptoes! Square, too, quite unusual boots! They come, they go, they come againof course that was for the cloak. Now where did they come from? He ran up and down, sometimes losing, sometimes finding the track un- til we were well within the edge of the wood and under the shadow of a great beech, the largest tree in the neighbourhood. Holmes traced his way to the farther side of this and lay down once more upon his face with a little cry of satisfaction.  For   a long time he remained there, turning over the leaves and dried sticks, gathering up what seemed
to me to be dust into an envelope and examining with his lens not only the ground but even the bark of the tree as far as he could reach. A jagged stone was lying among the moss, and this also he care- fully examined and retained. Then he followed a pathway through the wood until he came to the highroad, where all traces were lost.
It has been a case of  considerable interest, he remarked, returning to his natural manner. I fancy that this grey house on the right must be the lodge. I think that I will go in and have  a word  with Moran, and perhaps write a little note. Hav- ing done that, we may drive back to our luncheon. You may walk to the cab, and I shall be with you presently.
It was about ten minutes before we regained our cab and drove back into Ross, Holmes still carrying with him the stone which he had picked up in the wood.
This may interest you, Lestrade, he remarked, holding it out. The murder was done with it.
I see no marks. There are none.
How do you know, then?
The grass was growing under it. It had only lain there a few days. There was no sign of a place whence it had been taken. It corresponds with the injuries. There is no sign of any other weapon.
And the murderer?
Is a tall man, left-handed, limps with the right leg, wears thick-soled shooting-boots and a grey cloak, smokes Indian cigars, uses a cigar-holder, and carries a blunt pen-knife in his pocket. There are several other indications, but these may be enough to aid us in our search.
Lestrade laughed. I am afraid that I am still a sceptic, he said. Theories are all very well, but  we have to deal with a hard-headed British jury.
Nous verrons, answered Holmes calmly. You work your own method, and I shall work mine. I shall be busy this afternoon, and shall probably return to London by the evening train.
And leave your case unfinished? No, finished.
But the mystery? It is solved.
Who was the criminal, then? The gentleman I describe. But who is he?
Surely it would not be difficult to find out. This is not such a populous neighbourhood.



Lestrade shrugged his shoulders. I am a prac- tical man, he said, and I really cannot undertake to go about the country looking for a left-handed gentleman with a game leg. I should become the laughing-stock of Scotland Yard.
All right, said Holmes quietly. I have given you the chance. Here are your lodgings. Good-bye. I shall drop you a line before I leave.
Having left Lestrade at his rooms, we drove to our hotel, where we found lunch upon the table. Holmes was silent and buried in thought with a pained expression upon his face, as one who finds himself in a perplexing position.
Look here, Watson, he said when the cloth was cleared just sit down in this chair and let me preach to you for a little. I dont know quite what to do, and I should value your advice. Light a cigar and let me expound.
Pray do so.
Well, now, in considering this case there are two points about young McCarthys narrative which struck us both instantly, although they im- pressed me in his favour and you against him. One was the fact that his father should, according to  his account, cry Cooee! before seeing him. The other was his singular dying reference to a rat. He mumbled several words, you understand, but that was all that caught the sons ear. Now from this double point our research must commence, and we will begin it by presuming that what the lad says is absolutely true.
What of this Cooee! then?
Well, obviously it could not have been meant for the son. The son, as far as he knew, was in Bris- tol. It was mere chance that he was within earshot. The Cooee! was meant  to  attract  the  attention of whoever it was that he had the appointment with. But Cooee is a distinctly Australian cry, and one which is used between Australians.  There is    a strong presumption that the person whom Mc- Carthy expected to meet him at Boscombe Pool was someone who had been in Australia.
What of the rat, then?
Sherlock Holmes took a folded paper from his pocket and flattened it out on the table. This is a map of the Colony of Victoria, he said. I wired to Bristol for it last night. He put his hand over part of the map. What do you read?
ARAT, I read.
And now? He raised his hand. BALLARAT.
Quite so. That was the word the man uttered, and of which his son only caught the last two syl- lables. He was trying to utter the name of his murderer. So and so, of Ballarat.
It is wonderful! I  exclaimed.
It is obvious. And now, you see, I had nar- rowed the field down considerably. The possession of a grey garment was a third point which, granting the sons statement to be correct, was a certainty. We have come now out of mere vagueness to the definite conception of an Australian from Ballarat with a grey cloak.
Certainly.
And one who was at home in the district, for the pool can only be approached by the farm or by the estate, where strangers could hardly wander.
Quite so.
Then comes our expedition of to-day. By an examination of the ground I gained the trifling de- tails which I gave to that imbecile Lestrade, as to the personality of the criminal.
But how did you gain them?
You know my method. It is founded upon the observation of trifles.
His height I know that you might roughly judge from the length of his stride. His boots, too, might be told from their traces.
Yes, they were peculiar boots. But his lameness?
The impression of his right foot was always less distinct than his left. He put less weight upon it. Why? Because he limpedhe was lame.
But his left-handedness.
You were yourself struck by the nature of the injury as recorded by the surgeon at the inquest. The blow was struck from immediately behind, and yet was upon the left side. Now, how can that be unless it were by a left-handed man? He had stood behind that tree during the interview between the father and son. He had even smoked there. I found the ash of a  cigar,  which  my  special  knowledge of tobacco ashes enables me to pronounce as an Indian cigar. I have, as you know, devoted some attention to this, and written a little monograph on the ashes of 140 different varieties of pipe, cigar, and cigarette tobacco. Having found the ash, I then looked round and discovered the stump among the moss where he had tossed it. It was an Indian cigar, of the variety which are rolled in Rotterdam.
And the cigar-holder?
I could see that the end had not been in his mouth. Therefore he used a holder. The tip had been cut off, not bitten off, but the cut was not a clean one, so I deduced a blunt pen-knife.



Holmes, I said, you have drawn a net round this man from which he cannot escape, and you have saved an innocent human life as truly as if you had cut the cord which was hanging him. I see the direction in which all this points. The culprit is
Mr. John Turner, cried the hotel waiter, open- ing the door of our sitting-room, and ushering in a visitor.
The man who entered was a strange and im- pressive figure. His slow, limping step and bowed shoulders gave the appearance of decrepitude, and yet his hard, deep-lined, craggy features, and his enormous limbs showed that he was possessed of unusual strength of body and of character. His tan- gled beard, grizzled hair, and outstanding, droop- ing eyebrows combined to give an air of  dignity and power to his appearance, but his face was of an ashen white, while his lips and the corners of his nostrils were tinged with a shade of blue. It was clear to me at a glance that he was in the grip of some deadly and chronic disease.
Pray sit down on the sofa, said Holmes gently. You had my note?
Yes, the lodge-keeper brought it up. You said that you wished to see me here to avoid scandal.
I thought people would talk if I went to the Hall.
And why did you wish to see me? He looked across at my companion with despair in his weary eyes, as though his question was already answered.
Yes, said Holmes, answering the look rather than the words. It is so. I know all about Mc- Carthy.
The old man sank his face in his hands. God help me! he cried. But I would not have let the young man come to harm. I give you my word that I would have spoken out if it went against him at the Assizes.
I am glad to hear you say so, said Holmes gravely.
I would have spoken now had it not been for my dear girl. It would break her heartit will break her heart when she hears that I am arrested.
It may not come to that, said Holmes. What?
I am no official agent. I understand that it was your daughter who required my presence here, and I am acting in her interests. Young McCarthy must be got off, however.
I am a dying man, said old Turner. I have  had diabetes for years. My doctor says it is a ques- tion whether I shall live a month. Yet I would rather die under my own roof than in a jail.
Holmes rose and sat down at the table with his pen in his hand and a bundle of paper before him. Just tell us the truth, he said. I shall jot down the facts. You will sign it, and Watson here can witness it. Then I could produce your confession  at  the last extremity to save young McCarthy. I promise you that I shall not use it unless it is absolutely needed.
Its as well, said the old man; its a question whether I shall live to the Assizes, so it matters little to me, but I should wish to spare Alice the shock. And now I will make the thing clear to you; it has been a long time in the acting, but will not take me long to tell.
You didnt know this dead man, McCarthy. He was a devil incarnate. I tell you that. God keep you out of the clutches of such a man as he. His grip has been upon me these twenty years, and he has blasted my life. Ill tell you first how I came to be  in his power.
It was in the early 60s at the diggings. I was a young chap then, hot-blooded and reckless, ready to turn my hand at anything; I got among bad com- panions, took to drink, had no luck with my claim, took to the bush, and in a word became what you would call over here a highway robber. There were six of us, and we had a wild, free life of it, stick-  ing up a station from time to time, or stopping the wagons on the road to the diggings. Black Jack of Ballarat was the name I went under, and our party is still remembered in the colony as the Ballarat Gang.
One day a gold convoy came down from Bal- larat to Melbourne, and we lay in wait for it and attacked it. There were six troopers and six of us, so it was a close thing, but we emptied four of their saddles at the first volley. Three of our boys were killed, however, before we got the swag. I put my pistol to the head of the wagon-driver, who was this very man McCarthy. I wish to the Lord that I had shot him then, but I spared him, though I saw his wicked little eyes fixed on my face, as though to remember every feature. We got away with the gold, became wealthy men, and made our way over to England without being suspected. There I parted from my old pals and determined to settle down to a quiet and respectable life. I bought this estate, which chanced to be in the market, and I set myself to do a little good with my money, to make up for the way in which I had earned it. I married, too,



and though my wife died young she left me my dear little Alice. Even when she was just a baby her wee hand seemed to lead me down the right path as nothing else had ever done. In a word, I turned over a new leaf and did my best to make up for the past. All was going well when McCarthy laid his grip upon me.
I had gone up to town about an investment, and I met him in Regent Street with hardly a coat to his back or a boot to his foot.
 Here we are, Jack, says he, touching me on the arm; well be as good as a family to you. Theres two of us, me and my son, and you can have the keeping of us. If you dontits a fine, law-abiding country is England, and theres always a policeman within hail.
Well, down they came to the west country, there was no shaking them off, and there they have lived rent free on my best land ever since. There was no rest for me, no peace, no forgetfulness; turn where I would, there was his cunning, grinning face at my elbow. It grew worse as Alice grew up, for he soon saw I was more afraid of her knowing my past than of the police. Whatever he wanted he must have, and whatever it was I gave him without question, land, money, houses, until at last he asked a thing which I could not give. He asked for Alice.
His son, you see, had grown up, and so had  my girl, and as I was known to be in weak  health,  it seemed a fine stroke to him that his lad should step into the whole property. But there I was  firm. I would not have his cursed stock mixed with mine; not that I had any dislike to the lad, but his blood was in him, and that was enough. I stood firm. McCarthy threatened. I braved him to do his worst. We were to meet at the pool midway between our houses to talk it over.
When I went down there I found him talking with his son, so I smoked a cigar and waited behind a tree until he should be alone. But as I listened to his talk all that was black and bitter in me seemed to come uppermost. He was urging his son to marry my daughter with as little regard for what she might think as if she were a slut from off the streets. It drove me mad to think that I and all that I held most dear should be in the power  of such    a man as this. Could I not snap the bond? I was
already a dying and a desperate man. Though clear of mind and fairly strong of limb, I knew that my own fate was sealed. But my memory and my girl! Both could be saved if I could but silence that foul tongue. I did it, Mr. Holmes. I would do it again. Deeply as I have sinned, I have led a life of mar- tyrdom to atone for it. But that my girl should be entangled in the same meshes which held me was more than I could suffer. I struck him down with no more compunction than if he had been some foul and venomous beast.  His cry brought back  his son; but I had gained the cover of the wood, though I was forced to go back to fetch the cloak which I had dropped in my flight. That is the true story, gentlemen, of all that occurred.
Well, it is not for me to judge you, said Holmes as the old man signed the statement which had been drawn out. I pray that we may never be exposed to such a temptation.
I pray not, sir. And what do you intend to do?
In view of your health, nothing. You are yourself aware that you will soon have to answer  for your deed at a higher court than the Assizes.      I will keep your confession, and if McCarthy is condemned I shall be forced to use it. If not, it shall never be seen by mortal eye; and your secret, whether you be alive or dead, shall be safe with  us.
Farewell, then, said the old man solemnly. Your own deathbeds, when they come, will be the easier for the thought of the peace which you have given to mine. Tottering and shaking in all his giant frame, he stumbled slowly from the room.
God help us! said Holmes after a long silence. Why does fate play such tricks with poor, helpless worms? I never hear of such a case as this that I do not think of Baxters words, and say, There, but for the grace of God, goes Sherlock Holmes. 
James McCarthy was acquitted at the Assizes on the strength of a number of objections which had been drawn out by Holmes and submitted to the defending counsel. Old Turner lived for seven months after our interview, but he is now dead; and there is every prospect that the son and daughter may come to live happily together in ignorance of the black cloud which rests upon their past.




























The Five Orange Pips





W
hen I glance over my notes and records of the Sherlock Holmes cases between the years 82 and 90, I am faced by so many which present strange and inter-
esting features that it is no easy matter to know which to choose and which to leave. Some, however, have already gained publicity through the papers, and others have not offered a field for those pecu- liar qualities which my friend possessed in so high a degree, and which it is the object of these papers to illustrate. Some, too, have baffled his analytical skill, and would be, as narratives, beginnings with- out an ending, while others have been but partially cleared up, and have their explanations founded rather upon conjecture and surmise than on that absolute logical proof which was so dear to him. There is, however, one of these last which was so remarkable in its details and so startling in its re- sults that I am tempted to give some account of it in spite of the fact that there are points in connection with it which never have been, and probably never will be, entirely cleared up.
The year 87 furnished us  with  a  long  series of cases of greater or less interest, of which I re- tain the records. Among my headings under this one twelve months I find an account of the ad- venture of the Paradol Chamber, of the Amateur Mendicant Society, who held a luxurious club in  the lower vault of a furniture warehouse, of the facts connected with the loss of the British barque Sophy Anderson, of the singular adventures of the Grice Patersons in the island of Uffa, and finally of the Camberwell poisoning case. In the latter, as may be remembered, Sherlock Holmes was able, by winding up the dead mans watch,  to prove  that    it had been wound up two hours before, and that therefore the deceased had gone to bed within that timea deduction which was of the greatest im- portance in clearing up the case. All these I may sketch out at some future date, but none of them present such singular features as the strange train of circumstances which I have now taken up my pen to describe.
It was in the latter days of September, and the equinoctial gales had set in with exceptional vi- olence. All day the wind had screamed and  the rain had beaten against the windows, so that even here in the heart of great, hand-made London we were forced to raise our minds for the instant from the routine of life and to recognise the presence    of those great elemental forces which shriek at mankind through the bars of his civilisation, like untamed beasts in a cage. As evening drew in, the storm grew higher and louder, and the wind cried and sobbed like a child in the chimney. Sherlock
Holmes sat moodily at one side of the fireplace cross-indexing his records of crime, while I at the other was deep in one of Clark Russells fine sea- stories until the howl of the gale from without seemed to blend with the text, and the splash of the rain to lengthen out into the long swash of the sea waves. My wife was on a visit to her mothers, and for a few days I was a dweller once more in  my old quarters at Baker Street.
Why, said I, glancing up at my companion, that was surely the bell. Who could come to-night? Some friend of yours, perhaps?
Except yourself I have none, he answered. I do not encourage visitors.
A client, then?
If so, it is a serious case. Nothing less would bring a man out on such a day and at such an hour. But I take it that it is more likely to be some crony of the landladys.
Sherlock Holmes was wrong in his conjecture, however, for there came a step in the passage and a tapping at the door. He stretched out his long arm to turn the lamp away from himself and towards the vacant chair upon which a newcomer must sit.
Come in! said he.
The man who entered was young, some two- and-twenty at the outside, well-groomed and trimly clad, with something of refinement and delicacy in his bearing. The streaming umbrella which he held in his hand, and his long shining waterproof told of the fierce weather through which he had come. He looked about him anxiously in the glare of the lamp, and I could see that his face was pale and  his eyes heavy, like those of a man who is weighed down with some great anxiety.
I owe you an apology, he said, raising his golden pince-nez to his eyes. I trust that I am not intruding. I fear that I have brought some traces of the storm and rain into your snug chamber.
Give me your coat and umbrella, said Holmes. They may rest here on the hook and will be dry presently.  You  have  come up from the south-west, I see.
Yes, from Horsham.
That clay and chalk mixture which I see upon your toe caps is quite distinctive.
I have come for advice. That is easily got. And help.
That is not always so easy.



I have heard of you, Mr. Holmes. I  heard  from Major Prendergast how you saved him  in  the Tankerville Club scandal.
Ah, of course. He was wrongfully accused of cheating at cards.
He said that you could solve anything. He said too much.
That you are never beaten.
I have been beaten four timesthree times by men, and once by a woman.
But what is that compared with the number of your successes?
It is true that I have been generally successful. Then you may be so with me.
I beg that you will draw your chair up to the fire and favour me with some details as to your case.
It is no ordinary one.
None of those which come to me are. I am the last court of appeal.
And yet I question, sir, whether, in all your experience, you have ever listened to a more mys- terious and inexplicable chain of events than those which have happened in my own family.
You fill me with interest, said Holmes. Pray give us the essential facts from the commencement, and I can afterwards question you as to those de- tails which seem to me to be most important.
The young man pulled his chair up and pushed his wet feet out towards the blaze.
My name, said he, is John Openshaw, but my own affairs have, as far as I can understand, lit- tle to do with this awful business. It is a hereditary matter; so in order to give you an idea of the facts,  I must go back to the commencement of the affair.
You must know that my grandfather had two sonsmy uncle Elias and my father Joseph. My father had a small factory at Coventry, which he enlarged at the time of the invention of bicycling. He was a patentee of the Openshaw unbreakable tire, and his business met with such success that he was able to sell it and to retire upon a handsome competence.
My uncle Elias emigrated to America when he was a young man and became a planter in Florida, where he was reported to have done very well. At the time of the war he fought in Jacksons army, and afterwards under Hood,  where he rose to be   a colonel. When Lee laid down his arms my un-  cle returned to his plantation, where he remained for three or four years. About 1869 or 1870 he
came back to Europe and took a small estate in Sussex, near Horsham. He had made a very con- siderable fortune in the States, and his reason for leaving them was his aversion to the negroes, and his dislike of the Republican policy in extending the franchise to them. He was a singular man, fierce and quick-tempered, very foul-mouthed when he was angry, and of a most retiring disposition. Dur- ing all the years that he lived at Horsham, I doubt if ever he set foot in the town. He had a garden  and two or three fields round his house, and there he would take his exercise, though very often for weeks on end he would never leave his room. He drank a great deal of brandy and smoked very heavily, but he would see no society and did not want any friends, not even his own brother.
He didnt mind me;  in fact,  he took a fancy   to me, for at the time when he saw  me first I was   a youngster of twelve or so. This would be in the year 1878,  after he had been eight or nine years   in England. He begged my father to let me live  with him and he was very kind to me in his way. When he was sober he used to be fond of playing backgammon and draughts with me, and he would make me his representative both with the servants and with the tradespeople, so that by the time that I was sixteen I was quite master of the house. I  kept all the keys and could go where I liked and   do what I liked, so long as I did not disturb him    in his privacy. There was one singular exception, however, for he had a single room, a lumber-room up among the attics, which was invariably locked, and which he would never permit either me or anyone else to enter. With a boys curiosity I have peeped through the keyhole, but I was never able  to see more than such a collection of old trunks and bundles as would be expected in such a room.
One dayit was in March, 1883a letter with a foreign stamp lay upon the table in front of the colonels plate. It was not a common thing for him to receive letters, for his bills were all paid in ready money, and he had no friends of any sort. From India! said he as he took it up, Pondicherry post- mark! What can this be? Opening it hurriedly, out there jumped five little dried orange pips, which pattered down upon his plate.   I began to laugh    at this, but the laugh was struck from my lips at  the sight of his face. His lip had fallen, his eyes were protruding, his skin the colour of putty, and he glared at the envelope which he still held in his trembling hand, K. K. K.! he shrieked, and then, My God, my God, my sins have overtaken me!
 What is it, uncle? I cried.
 Death, said he, and rising from the table he retired to his room, leaving me palpitating with



horror. I took up the envelope and saw  scrawled  in red ink upon the inner flap, just above the gum, the letter K three times repeated. There was noth- ing else save the five  dried pips.  What could be  the reason of his overpowering terror? I left the breakfast-table, and as I ascended the stair I met him coming down with an old rusty key, which must have belonged to the attic, in one hand, and a small brass box, like a cashbox, in the other.
 They may do what they like, but Ill check- mate them still, said he with an oath. Tell Mary that I shall want a fire in my room to-day, and send down to Fordham, the Horsham lawyer.
I did as he ordered, and when the lawyer ar- rived I was asked to step up to the room. The fire was  burning brightly, and in the grate there was    a mass of black, fluffy ashes, as of burned paper, while the brass box stood open and empty beside it. As I glanced at the box I noticed, with a start, that upon the lid was printed the treble K which I had read in the morning upon the envelope.
 I wish you, John, said my uncle, to witness my will. I leave my estate, with all its advantages and all its disadvantages, to my brother, your father, whence it will, no doubt, descend to you. If you  can enjoy it in peace, well and good! If you find  you cannot, take my advice, my boy, and leave it to your deadliest enemy. I am sorry to give  you  such a two-edged thing, but I cant say what turn things are going to take. Kindly sign the paper where Mr. Fordham shows you.
I signed the paper as directed, and the lawyer took it away with him. The singular incident made, as you may think, the deepest impression upon me, and I pondered over it and turned it every way in my mind without being able to make anything of it. Yet I could not shake off the vague feeling of dread which it left behind, though the sensation grew less keen as the weeks passed and nothing happened to disturb the usual routine of our lives. I could see a change in my uncle, however. He drank more than ever, and he was less inclined for any sort of society. Most of his time he would spend in his room, with the door locked upon the inside, but sometimes he would emerge in a sort of drunken frenzy and would burst out of the house and tear about the garden with a revolver in his hand, screaming out that he was afraid of no man, and that he was not to be cooped up, like a sheep in a pen, by man or devil. When these hot fits were over, however, he would rush tumultuously in at the door and lock and bar it behind him, like a man who can brazen it out no longer against the terror which lies at the roots of his soul. At such times I have seen his
face, even on a cold day, glisten with moisture, as though it were new raised from a basin.
Well, to come to an end of the matter, Mr. Holmes, and not to abuse your patience, there came a night when he made one of those drunken sallies from which he never came back. We found him, when we went  to search for him, face downward  in a little green-scummed pool, which lay at the foot of the garden. There was no sign of any vio- lence, and the water was but two feet deep, so that the jury, having regard to his known eccentricity, brought in a verdict of suicide. But I, who knew how he winced from the very thought of death, had much ado to persuade myself that he had gone out of his way to meet it. The matter passed, however, and my father entered into possession of the estate, and of some 14,000, which lay to his credit at the bank.
One moment, Holmes interposed, your state- ment is, I foresee, one of the most remarkable to which I have ever  listened.  Let me have  the date  of the reception by your uncle of the letter, and the date of his supposed suicide.
The letter arrived on March 10, 1883. His death was seven weeks later, upon the night of May 2nd.
Thank you. Pray proceed.
When my father took over the Horsham prop- erty, he, at my request, made a careful examination of the attic, which had been always locked up. We found the brass box there, although its contents had been destroyed. On the inside of the cover was a paper label, with the initials of K. K. K. repeated upon it, and Letters, memoranda, receipts, and a register written beneath. These, we presume, in- dicated the nature of the papers which had been destroyed by Colonel Openshaw. For the rest, there was nothing of much importance in the attic save a great many scattered papers and note-books bear- ing upon my uncles life in America. Some of them were of the war time and showed that he had done his duty well and had borne the repute of a brave soldier. Others were of a date during the recon- struction of the Southern states, and were mostly concerned with politics, for he had evidently taken a strong part in opposing the carpet-bag politicians who had been sent down from the North.
Well, it was the beginning of 84 when my fa- ther came to live at Horsham, and all went as well as possible with us until the January of 85.  On  the fourth day after the new year I heard my father give a sharp cry of surprise as we sat together at  the breakfast-table. There he was, sitting with a newly opened envelope in one hand and five dried orange pips in the outstretched palm of the other



one. He had always laughed  at  what  he  called my cock-and-bull story about the colonel, but he looked very scared and puzzled now that the same thing had come upon himself.
 Why, what on earth does this mean, John? he stammered.
My heart had turned to lead. It is K. K. K., said I.
He looked inside the envelope. So it is, he cried. Here are the very letters. But what is this written above them?
 Put the papers on the sundial, I read, peeping over his shoulder.
 What papers? What sundial? he asked.
 The sundial in the garden. There is no other, said I; but the papers must be those that are de- stroyed.
 Pooh! said he, gripping hard at his courage. We are in a civilised land here, and we cant have tomfoolery of this kind. Where does the thing come from?
 From Dundee, I answered, glancing at the postmark.
 Some preposterous practical joke, said he. What have I to do with sundials and papers? I  shall take no notice of such nonsense.
 I should certainly speak to the police, I said.  And be laughed at for my pains. Nothing of
the sort.
 Then let me do so?
 No, I forbid you. I wont have a fuss made about such nonsense.
It was in vain to argue with him, for he was a very obstinate man. I went about, however, with a heart which was full of forebodings.
On the third day after the coming of the letter my father went from home to visit an old friend of his, Major Freebody, who is in command of one of the forts upon Portsdown Hill. I was glad that he should go, for it seemed to me that he was farther from danger when he was away from home.  In that, however, I was in error. Upon the second day of his absence I received a telegram from the major, imploring me to come at once. My father had fallen over one of the deep chalk-pits which abound in the neighbourhood, and was lying senseless, with  a shattered skull. I hurried to him, but he passed away without having ever recovered his conscious- ness. He had, as it appears, been returning from Fareham in the twilight, and as the country was unknown to him, and the chalk-pit unfenced, the
jury had no hesitation in bringing in a verdict of death from accidental causes. Carefully as I ex- amined every fact connected with his death, I was unable to find anything which could suggest the idea of murder. There were no signs  of  violence, no footmarks, no robbery, no record of strangers having been seen upon the roads. And yet I need not tell you that my mind was far from at ease, and that I was well-nigh certain that some foul plot had been woven round him.
In this sinister way I came into my inheritance. You will ask me why I did not dispose of it? I answer, because I was well convinced that our trou- bles were in some way dependent upon an incident in my uncles life, and that the danger would be as pressing in one house as in another.
It was in January, 85, that my poor  father met his end, and two years and eight months have elapsed since then. During that time I have lived happily at Horsham, and I had begun to hope that this curse had passed away from the family, and that it had ended with the last generation. I had begun to take comfort too soon, however; yesterday morning the blow fell in the very shape in which it had come upon my father.
The young man took from his waistcoat a crum- pled envelope, and turning to the table he shook out upon it five little dried orange pips.
This is the envelope, he continued. The post- mark is Londoneastern division. Within are the very words which were upon my fathers last mes- sage: K. K. K.; and then Put the papers on the sundial. 
What have you done? asked Holmes. Nothing.
Nothing?
To tell the truthhe sank his face into his thin, white handsI have felt helpless. I have felt like one of those poor rabbits when the snake is writhing towards it. I seem to be in the grasp of some resistless, inexorable evil, which no foresight and no precautions can guard against.
Tut! tut! cried Sherlock Holmes. You must act, man, or you are lost. Nothing but energy can save you. This is no time for despair.
I have seen the police. Ah!
But they listened to my story with a smile. I am convinced that the inspector has formed the opin- ion that the letters are all practical jokes, and that the deaths of my relations were really accidents, as the jury stated, and were not to be connected with the warnings.



Holmes shook his clenched hands in the air. Incredible imbecility! he cried.
They have, however, allowed me a policeman, who may remain in the house with me.
Has he come with you to-night?
No. His orders were to stay in the house. Again Holmes raved in the air.
Why did you come to me, he cried, and, above all, why did you not come at once?
I did not know. It was only to-day that I spoke to Major Prendergast about my troubles and was advised by him to come to you.
It is really two days since you had the letter. We should have acted before this. You have no further evidence, I suppose, than that which you have placed before usno suggestive detail which might help us?
There is one thing, said John Openshaw. He rummaged in his coat pocket, and, drawing out a piece of discoloured, blue-tinted paper, he laid it out upon the table. I have some remembrance, said he, that on the day when my uncle burned the papers I observed that the small, unburned margins which lay amid the ashes were of this particular colour. I found this single sheet upon the floor of his room,  and I am inclined to think that it may   be one of the papers which has, perhaps, fluttered out from among the others, and in that way has escaped destruction. Beyond the mention of pips, I do not see that it helps us much. I think myself that it is a page from some private diary. The writing is undoubtedly my uncles.
Holmes moved the lamp, and we both bent over the sheet of paper, which showed by its ragged edge that it had indeed been torn from a book. It was headed, March, 1869, and beneath were the following enigmatical notices:
4th. Hudson came. Same old platform.
7th. Set the pips on McCauley, Paramore, and John Swain, of St. Augustine.
9th. McCauley cleared.
10th. John Swain cleared.
12th. Visited Paramore. All well.
Thank you! said Holmes, folding up the pa- per and returning it to our visitor. And now you must on no account lose another instant. We cannot spare time even to discuss what you have told me. You must get home instantly and act.
What shall I do?
There is but one thing to do. It must be done at once. You must put this piece of paper which you have shown us into the brass box which you have
described. You must also put in a note to say that all the other papers were burned by your uncle, and that this is the only one which remains. You must assert that in such words as will carry conviction with them. Having done this, you must at once put the box out upon the sundial, as directed. Do you understand?
Entirely.
Do not think of revenge, or anything of the sort, at present. I think that we may gain that by means of the law; but we have our web to weave, while theirs is already woven. The first consideration is  to remove the pressing danger which threatens you. The second is to clear up the mystery and to punish the guilty parties.
I thank you, said the young man, rising and pulling on his overcoat. You have given me fresh life and hope. I shall certainly do as you advise.
Do not lose an instant. And, above all, take care of yourself in the meanwhile, for I do not think that there can be a doubt that you are threatened by a very real and imminent danger. How do you go back?
By train from Waterloo.
It is not yet nine. The streets will be crowded, so I trust that you may be in safety. And yet you cannot guard yourself too closely.
I am armed.
That is well. To-morrow I shall set to work upon your case.
I shall see you at Horsham, then?
No, your secret lies in London. It is there that I shall seek it.
Then I shall call upon you in a day, or in two days, with news as to the box and the papers. I shall take your advice in every particular. He shook hands with us and took his leave.  Outside  the wind still screamed and the rain splashed and pat- tered against the windows. This strange, wild story seemed to have come to us from amid the mad ele- mentsblown in upon us like a sheet of sea-weed in a galeand now to have been reabsorbed by them once more.
Sherlock Holmes sat for some time in silence, with his head sunk forward and his eyes bent upon the red glow of the fire.  Then  he  lit  his  pipe,  and leaning back in his chair he watched the blue smoke-rings as they chased each other up to the ceiling.
I think, Watson, he remarked at last, that of all our cases we have had none more fantastic than this.
Save, perhaps, the Sign of Four.



Well, yes. Save, perhaps, that. And yet this John Openshaw seems to me to be walking amid even greater perils than did the Sholtos.
But have you, I asked, formed any definite conception as to what these perils are?
There can be no question as to their nature, he answered.
Then what are they? Who is this K. K. K., and why does he pursue this unhappy family?
Sherlock Holmes closed his eyes and placed his elbows upon the arms of his chair, with his finger- tips together. The ideal reasoner, he remarked, would, when he had once been shown a  single fact in all its bearings, deduce from it not only all the chain of events which led up to it but also all the results which would follow from it. As Cuvier could correctly describe a whole animal by the con- templation of a single bone, so the observer who has thoroughly understood one link in a series of incidents should be able to accurately state all the other ones, both before and after. We have not yet grasped the results which the reason alone can at- tain to. Problems may be solved in the study which have baffled all those who have sought a solution  by the aid of their senses. To carry the art, however, to its highest pitch, it is necessary that the reasoner should be able to utilise all the facts which have come to his knowledge; and this in itself implies, as you will readily see, a possession of all knowledge, which, even in these days of free education and en- cyclopaedias, is a somewhat rare accomplishment. It is not so impossible, however, that a man should possess all knowledge which is likely to be useful  to him in his work,  and this I have  endeavoured  in my case to do. If I remember rightly,  you  on  one occasion, in the early days of our friendship, defined my limits in a very precise fashion.
Yes, I answered, laughing. It was  a singu-  lar document. Philosophy, astronomy, and politics were marked at zero, I remember. Botany variable, geology profound as regards the mud-stains from any region within fifty miles of town, chemistry eccentric, anatomy unsystematic, sensational litera- ture and crime records unique, violin-player, boxer, swordsman, lawyer, and self-poisoner by cocaine and tobacco. Those, I think, were the main points of my analysis.
Holmes grinned at the last item. Well, he said, I say now, as I said then, that a man should keep his little brain-attic stocked with all the furniture that he is likely to use, and the rest he can put away in the lumber-room of his library,  where he can  get it if he wants it.  Now,  for such a case as the  one which has been submitted to us to-night, we
need certainly to muster all our resources. Kindly hand me down the letter K of the American En- cyclopaedia which stands upon the shelf beside you. Thank you. Now let us consider the situation and see what may be deduced from it. In the first place, we may start with a strong presumption that Colonel Openshaw had some very strong reason for leaving America. Men at his  time  of  life  do not change all their habits and exchange willingly the charming climate of Florida for the lonely life of an English provincial town.   His extreme love   of solitude in England suggests the idea that he was in fear of someone or something, so we may assume as a working hypothesis that it was  fear   of someone or something which drove him from America. As to what it was he feared, we can only deduce that by considering the formidable letters which were received by himself and his successors. Did you remark the postmarks of those letters?
The first was from Pondicherry, the second from Dundee, and the third from London.
From East London. What do you deduce from that?
They are all seaports. That the writer was on board of a ship.
Excellent. We have already a clue.  There can be no doubt that the probabilitythe strong prob- abilityis that the writer was on board of a ship. And now let us consider another point. In the case of Pondicherry, seven weeks elapsed between the threat and its fulfilment, in Dundee it was only some three or four days. Does that suggest any- thing?
A greater distance to travel.
But the letter had also a greater distance to come.
Then I do not see the point.
There is at least a presumption that the vessel in which the man or men are is a sailing-ship. It looks as if they always send their singular warn- ing or token before them when starting upon their mission. You see how quickly the deed  followed the sign when it came from Dundee. If they had come from Pondicherry in a steamer they would have  arrived almost as soon as their letter.  But,   as a matter of fact, seven weeks elapsed. I think that those seven weeks represented the difference between the mail-boat which brought the letter and the sailing vessel which brought the writer.
It is possible.
More than that. It is probable. And now you see the deadly urgency of this new case, and why I urged young Openshaw to caution. The blow has always fallen at the end of the time which it would



take the senders to travel the distance. But this one comes from London, and therefore we cannot count upon delay.
Good God! I cried. What can it mean, this relentless persecution?
The papers which Openshaw carried are obvi- ously of vital importance to the person or persons in the sailing-ship. I think that it is quite clear that there must be more than one of them. A single man could not have carried out two deaths in such a way as to deceive a coroners jury. There must have been several in it, and they must have been men of resource and determination. Their papers they mean to have, be the holder of them who it may. In this way you see K. K. K. ceases to be the initials of an individual and becomes the badge of a society.
But of what society?
Have you never said Sherlock Holmes, bending forward and sinking his voicehave you never heard of the Ku Klux Klan?
I never have.
Holmes turned over the leaves of the book upon his knee. Here it is, said he presently:
 Ku Klux Klan. A name derived from the fanciful resemblance to the sound produced by cocking a rifle. This terrible secret soci- ety was formed by some ex-Confederate sol- diers in the Southern states after the Civil War, and it rapidly formed local branches in different parts of the country, notably in Tennessee, Louisiana, the Carolinas, Geor- gia, and Florida. Its power was used for po- litical purposes, principally for the terroris- ing of the negro voters and the murdering and driving from the country of those who were opposed to its views. Its outrages were usually preceded by a warning sent to the marked man in some fantastic but generally recognised shapea sprig of oak-leaves in some parts, melon seeds or orange pips in others. On receiving this the victim might either openly abjure his former ways, or might fly from the country. If he braved the matter out, death would unfailingly come upon him, and usually in some strange and unforeseen manner. So perfect was the or- ganisation of the society, and so systematic its methods, that there is hardly a case upon record where any man succeeded in braving it with impunity, or in which any of its out- rages were traced home to the perpetrators. For some years the organisation flourished in spite of the efforts of the United States
government and of the better classes of the community in the South.  Eventually,  in the year 1869, the movement rather sud- denly collapsed, although there have been sporadic outbreaks of the same sort since that date.
You will observe, said Holmes, laying down the volume, that the sudden breaking up of the soci- ety was coincident with the disappearance of Open- shaw from America with their papers. It may well have been cause and effect.  It is  no wonder that  he and his family have some of the more implaca- ble spirits upon their track. You can understand that this register and diary may implicate some of the first men in the South, and that there may be many who will not sleep easy at night until it is recovered.
Then the page we have seen
Is such as we might expect. It ran, if I remem- ber right, sent the pips to A, B, and Cthat is, sent the societys warning to them. Then there are successive entries that A and B cleared, or left the country, and finally that C was visited, with, I fear, a sinister result for C. Well, I think, Doctor, that we may let some light into this dark place, and I be- lieve that the only chance young Openshaw has in the meantime is to do what I have told him. There is nothing more to be said or to be done to-night, so hand me over my violin and let us try to forget for half an hour the miserable weather and the still more miserable ways of our fellow-men.
It had cleared in the morning, and the sun was shining with a subdued brightness through the dim veil which hangs over the great  city.  Sher- lock Holmes was already at breakfast when I came down.
You will excuse me for not waiting for you, said he; I have, I foresee, a very busy day before me in looking into this case of young Openshaws.
What steps will you take? I asked.
It will very much depend upon the results of my first inquiries. I may have to go down to Hor- sham, after all.
You will not go there first?
No, I shall commence with the City. Just ring the bell and the maid will bring up your coffee.
As I waited, I lifted the unopened newspaper from the table and glanced my eye over it. It rested upon a heading which sent a chill to my heart.
Holmes, I cried, you are too late.
Ah! said he, laying down his cup, I feared as much. How was it done? He spoke calmly, but I could see that he was deeply moved.



My eye caught the name of Openshaw, and the heading Tragedy Near Waterloo Bridge. Here is the account:
Between nine and ten last night Police- Constable Cook, of the H Division, on duty near Waterloo Bridge, heard a cry for help and a splash in the water. The night, how- ever, was extremely dark and stormy, so that, in spite of the help of several passers- by, it was quite impossible to effect a res- cue. The alarm, however, was given, and, by the aid of the water-police, the body was eventually recovered. It proved to be that of a young gentleman whose name, as it ap- pears from an envelope which was found in his pocket, was John Openshaw, and whose residence is near Horsham. It is conjec- tured that he may have been hurrying down to catch the last train from Waterloo Sta- tion, and that in his haste and the extreme darkness he missed his path and walked over the edge of one of the small landing- places for river steamboats. The body ex- hibited no traces of violence, and there can be no doubt that the deceased had been the victim of an unfortunate accident, which should have the effect of calling the atten- tion of the authorities to the condition of the riverside landing-stages.
We sat in silence for some minutes, Holmes more depressed and shaken than I had ever seen him.
That hurts my pride, Watson, he said at last. It is a petty feeling, no doubt, but it hurts my pride. It becomes a personal matter with me now,  and,    if God sends me health, I shall set my hand upon this gang. That he should come to me for help, and that I should send him away to his death! He sprang from his chair and paced about the room in uncontrollable agitation, with a flush upon his sal- low cheeks and a nervous clasping and unclasping of his long thin hands.
They must be cunning devils, he exclaimed   at last. How could they have decoyed him down there? The Embankment is not on the direct line to the station. The bridge, no doubt, was too crowded, even on such a night, for their purpose. Well, Wat- son, we shall see who will win in the long run. I  am going out now!
To the police?
No; I shall be my own police. When I have spun the web they may take the flies, but not be- fore.
All day I was engaged in my professional work, and it was late in the evening before I returned
to Baker Street. Sherlock Holmes had not come back yet. It was nearly ten oclock before he en- tered, looking pale and worn. He walked up to the sideboard, and tearing a piece from the loaf he devoured it voraciously, washing it down with a long draught of water.
You are hungry, I remarked.
Starving. It had escaped my memory. I have had nothing since breakfast.
Nothing?
Not a bite. I had no time to think of it. And  how  have  you  succeeded? Well.
You have a clue?
I have them in the hollow of my hand. Young Openshaw shall not long remain unavenged. Why, Watson, let us put their own devilish trade-mark upon them. It is well thought of!
What do you mean?
He took an orange from the cupboard, and tear- ing it to pieces he squeezed out the pips upon the table. Of these he took five  and thrust them into  an envelope.   On the inside of the flap he wrote   S. H. for J. O. Then he sealed it and addressed    it to Captain James Calhoun, Barque Lone Star, Savannah, Georgia.
That will await him when he enters port, said he, chuckling. It may give him a sleepless night. He will find it as sure a precursor of his fate as Openshaw did before him.
And who is this Captain Calhoun?
The leader of the gang. I shall have the others, but he first.
How did you trace it, then?
He took a large sheet of paper from his pocket, all covered with dates and names.
I have spent the whole day, said he, over Lloyds registers and files of the old papers, follow- ing the future career of every vessel which touched at Pondicherry in January and February in 83. There were thirty-six ships of fair tonnage which were reported there during those months. Of these, one, the Lone Star, instantly attracted my attention, since, although it was reported as having cleared from London, the name is that which is given to one of the states of the Union.
Texas, I think.
I was not and am not sure which; but I knew that the ship must have an American origin.
What then?



I searched the Dundee records, and when I found that the barque Lone Star was there in Jan- uary, 85, my suspicion became a certainty. I then inquired as to the vessels which lay at present in the port of London.
Yes?
The Lone Star had arrived here last week. I went down to the Albert Dock and found that she had been taken down the river by the early tide this morning, homeward bound to Savannah. I wired to Gravesend and learned that she had passed some time ago, and as the wind is easterly I have no doubt that she is now past the Goodwins and not very far from the Isle of Wight.
What will you do, then?
Oh, I have my hand upon him. He and the two mates, are as I learn, the only native-born Ameri- cans in the ship. The others are Finns and Germans. I know, also, that they were all three away from
the ship last night. I had it from the stevedore  who has been loading their cargo. By the time that their sailing-ship reaches Savannah the mail-boat will have carried this letter, and the cable will have informed the police of Savannah that these three gentlemen are badly wanted here upon a charge of murder.
There is ever  a flaw,  however,  in the best laid  of human plans, and the murderers of John Open- shaw were never to receive the orange pips which would show them that another, as cunning and as resolute as themselves, was upon their track. Very long and very severe were the equinoctial gales that year. We waited long for news of the Lone Star of Savannah, but none ever reached us. We  did  at last hear that somewhere far out in the Atlantic a shattered stern-post of a boat was seen swinging in the trough of a wave, with the letters L. S. carved upon it, and that is all which we  shall ever  know  of the fate of the Lone Star.




























The Man with the Twisted Lip





I
sa Whitney, brother of the late Elias Whit- ney, D.D., Principal of the Theological College of St. Georges, was much ad- dicted to opium. The habit grew upon
him, as I understand, from some foolish freak when he was at college; for having read De Quinceys description of his dreams and sensations, he had drenched his tobacco with laudanum in an attempt to produce the same effects. He found, as so many more have done, that the practice is easier to attain than to get rid of, and for many years he contin- ued to be a slave to the drug, an object of mingled horror and pity to his friends and relatives. I can see him now, with yellow, pasty face, drooping lids, and pin-point pupils, all huddled in a chair, the wreck and ruin of a noble man.
One nightit was in June, 89there came a ring to my bell, about the hour when a man gives his first yawn and glances at the clock. I sat up in my chair, and my wife laid her needle-work down in her lap and made a little face of disappointment.
A patient! said she. Youll have to go out.
I groaned, for I was newly come back from a weary day.
We heard the door open, a few hurried words, and then quick steps upon the linoleum. Our own door flew open, and a lady, clad in some dark- coloured stuff, with a black veil, entered the room.
You will excuse my calling so late, she be- gan, and then, suddenly losing her self-control, she ran forward, threw her arms about my wifes neck, and sobbed upon her shoulder. Oh, Im in such trouble! she cried; I do so want a little help.
Why, said my wife, pulling up her veil, it is Kate Whitney. How you startled me, Kate! I had not an idea who you were when you came in.
I didnt know what to do, so I came straight to you. That was always the way. Folk who were in grief came to my wife like birds to a light-house.
It was very sweet of you to come. Now, you must have some wine and water, and sit here com- fortably and tell us all about it. Or should you rather that I sent James off to bed?
Oh, no, no! I want the doctors advice and help, too. Its about Isa. He has not been home for two days. I am so frightened about him!
It was not the first time that she had spoken to us of her husbands trouble, to me as a doctor, to my wife as an old friend and school companion. We soothed and comforted her by such words as  we could find. Did she know where her husband was? Was it possible that we could bring him back to her?
It seems that it was. She had the surest informa- tion that of late he had, when the fit was on him, made use of an opium den in the farthest east of the City. Hitherto his orgies had always been con- fined to one day, and he had come back, twitching and shattered, in the evening. But now the spell had been upon him eight-and-forty hours, and he lay there, doubtless among the dregs of the docks, breathing in the poison or sleeping off the effects. There he was to be found, she was  sure of it,  at  the Bar of Gold, in Upper Swandam Lane. But what was she to do? How could she, a young and timid woman, make her way into such a place and pluck her husband out from among the ruffians who surrounded him?
There was the case, and of course there was but one way out of it. Might I not escort her to this place? And then, as a second thought, why should she come at all? I was Isa Whitneys medical ad- viser, and as such I had influence over him. I could manage it better if I were  alone.  I promised her  on my word that I would send him home in a cab within two hours if he were indeed at the address which she had given me. And so in ten minutes I had left my armchair and cheery sitting-room be- hind me, and was speeding eastward in a hansom on a strange errand, as it seemed to me at the time, though the future only could show how strange it was to be.
But there was no great difficulty in the first stage of my adventure. Upper Swandam Lane is a vile al- ley lurking behind the high wharves which line the north side of the river to the east of London Bridge. Between a slop-shop and a gin-shop, approached by a steep flight of steps leading down to a black gap like the mouth of a cave, I found the den of which I was in search. Ordering my cab to wait, I passed down the steps, worn hollow in the centre by the ceaseless tread of drunken feet; and by the light of a flickering oil-lamp above the door I found the latch and made my way into a long, low room, thick and heavy with the brown opium smoke, and terraced with wooden berths, like the forecastle of an emigrant ship.
Through the gloom one could dimly catch a glimpse of bodies lying in strange fantastic poses, bowed shoulders, bent knees, heads thrown back, and chins pointing upward,  with here and there    a dark, lack-lustre eye turned upon the newcomer. Out of the black shadows there glimmered little red circles of light, now bright, now faint, as the burning poison waxed or waned in the bowls of  the metal pipes. The most lay silent, but some mut- tered to themselves, and others talked together in a strange, low, monotonous voice, their conversation



coming in gushes, and then suddenly tailing off into silence, each mumbling out his own thoughts and paying little heed to the words of his neighbour. At the farther end was a small brazier of burning charcoal, beside which on a three-legged wooden stool there sat a tall, thin old man, with his jaw resting upon his two fists, and his elbows upon his knees, staring into the fire.
As I entered, a sallow Malay attendant had hur- ried up with a pipe for me and a supply of the drug, beckoning me to an empty berth.
Thank you. I have not come to stay, said I. There is a friend of mine here, Mr. Isa Whitney, and I wish to speak with him.
There was a movement and an exclamation from my right, and peering through the gloom, I saw Whitney, pale, haggard, and unkempt, staring out at me.
My  God!  Its  Watson,  said  he.   He  was  in a pitiable state of reaction, with every nerve in a twitter. I say, Watson, what oclock is it?
Nearly eleven. Of what day?
Of Friday, June 19th.
Good heavens! I thought it was Wednesday. It is Wednesday. What dyou want to frighten a chap for? He sank his face onto his arms and began to sob in a high treble key.
I tell you that it is Friday, man. Your wife has been waiting this two days for you. You should be ashamed of yourself!
So I am. But youve got mixed, Watson, for I have only been here a few hours, three pipes, four pipesI forget how many. But Ill go home with you. I wouldnt frighten Katepoor little Kate. Give me your hand! Have you a cab?
Yes, I have one waiting.
Then I shall go in it. But I must owe something. Find what I owe, Watson. I am all off colour. I can do nothing for myself.
I walked down the narrow passage between the double row of sleepers, holding my breath to keep out the vile, stupefying fumes of the drug, and look- ing about for the manager. As I passed the tall man who sat by the brazier I felt a sudden pluck at my skirt, and a low voice whispered, Walk past me, and then look back at me. The words fell quite dis- tinctly upon my ear. I glanced down. They could only have come from the old man at my side, and yet he sat now as absorbed as ever, very thin, very wrinkled, bent with age, an opium pipe dangling down from between his knees, as though it had
dropped in sheer lassitude from his fingers. I took two steps forward and looked back. It took all my self-control to prevent me from breaking out into  a cry of astonishment. He had turned his back so that none could see him but I. His form had filled out, his wrinkles were gone, the dull eyes had re- gained their fire, and there, sitting by the fire and grinning at my surprise, was none other than Sher- lock Holmes. He made a slight motion to me to approach him, and instantly, as he turned his face half round to the company once more, subsided into a doddering, loose-lipped senility.
Holmes! I whispered, what on earth are you doing in this den?
As low as you can, he answered; I have ex- cellent ears. If you would have the great kindness to get rid of that sottish friend of yours I should be exceedingly glad to have a little talk with you.
I have a cab outside.
Then pray send him home in it. You may safely trust him, for he appears to be too limp to get into any mischief. I should recommend you also to send a note by the cabman to your wife to say that you have thrown in your lot with me. If you will wait outside, I shall be with you in five minutes.
It was difficult to refuse any of Sherlock Holmes requests, for they were always so exceedingly def- inite, and put forward with such a quiet air of mastery. I felt, however, that when Whitney was once confined in the cab my mission was practi- cally accomplished; and for the rest, I could not wish anything better than to be associated with my friend in one of those singular adventures which were the normal condition of his existence. In a few minutes I had written my note, paid Whitneys bill, led him out to the cab, and seen him driven through the darkness. In a very short time a decrepit figure had emerged from the opium den, and I was walk- ing down the street with Sherlock Holmes. For two streets he shuffled along with a bent back and an uncertain foot. Then, glancing quickly round, he straightened himself out and burst into a hearty fit of laughter.
I suppose, Watson, said he, that you imagine that I have added opium-smoking to cocaine injec- tions, and all the other little weaknesses on which you have favoured me with your medical views.
I was certainly surprised to find you there. But not more so than I to find you.
I came to find a friend. And I to find an enemy. An enemy?
Yes; one of my natural enemies, or, shall I say, my natural prey. Briefly, Watson, I am in the midst



of a very remarkable inquiry, and I have hoped to find a clue in the incoherent ramblings of these sots, as I have done before now. Had I been recognised in that den my life would not have been worth an hours purchase; for I have used it before now for my own purposes, and the rascally Lascar who runs it has sworn to have  vengeance upon me.  There   is a trap-door at the back of that building,  near  the corner of Pauls Wharf, which could tell some strange tales of what has passed through it upon the moonless nights.
What! You do not mean bodies?
Ay, bodies, Watson. We should be rich men if we had 1000 for every poor devil who has been done to death in that den. It is the vilest murder- trap on the whole riverside, and I fear that Neville St. Clair has entered it never to leave it more. But our trap should be here. He put his two forefingers between his teeth and whistled shrillya signal which was answered by a similar whistle from the distance, followed shortly by the rattle of wheels and the clink of horses hoofs.
Now, Watson, said Holmes, as a tall dog-cart dashed up through the gloom, throwing out two golden tunnels of yellow light from its side lanterns. Youll come with me, wont you?
If I can be of  use.
Oh, a trusty comrade is always of use; and a chronicler still more so. My room at The Cedars is a double-bedded one.
The Cedars?
Yes; that is Mr. St. Clairs house. I am staying there while I conduct the inquiry.
Where is it, then?
Near Lee, in Kent. We have a seven-mile drive before us.
But I am all in the dark.
Of course you are. Youll know all about it presently. Jump up here. All right, John; we shall not need you. Heres half a crown. Look out for  me to-morrow, about eleven. Give her her head. So long, then!
He flicked the horse with his whip, and we dashed away through the endless succession of sombre and deserted streets, which widened gradu- ally, until we were flying across a broad balustraded bridge, with the murky river flowing sluggishly beneath us. Beyond  lay  another  dull  wilderness of bricks and mortar, its silence broken  only  by the heavy, regular footfall of the policeman, or the songs and shouts of some belated party of revellers. A dull wrack was drifting slowly across the sky,
and a star or two twinkled dimly here and there through the rifts of the clouds. Holmes drove in silence, with his head sunk upon his breast, and the air of a man who is lost in thought, while I sat beside him, curious to learn what this new quest might be which seemed to tax his powers so sorely, and yet afraid to break in upon the current of his thoughts. We had driven several miles, and were beginning to get to the fringe of the belt of subur- ban villas, when he shook himself, shrugged his shoulders, and lit up his pipe with the air of a man who has satisfied himself that he is acting for the best.
You have a grand gift of silence, Watson, said he. It makes you quite invaluable as a companion. Pon my word, it is a great thing for me to have someone to talk to, for my own thoughts are not over-pleasant. I was wondering what I should say to this dear little woman to-night when she meets me at the door.
You forget that I know nothing about it.
I shall just have time to tell you the facts of the case before we get to Lee. It seems absurdly simple, and yet, somehow I can get nothing to go upon. Theres plenty of thread, no doubt, but I cant get the end of it into my hand. Now, Ill state the case clearly and concisely to you, Watson, and maybe you can see a spark where all is dark to me.
Proceed, then.
Some years agoto be definite, in May, 1884there came to Lee a gentleman, Neville St. Clair by name, who appeared to have plenty of money. He took a large villa, laid out the grounds very nicely, and lived generally in good style. By degrees he made friends in the neighbourhood, and in 1887 he married the daughter of a local brewer, by whom he now has two children. He had no oc- cupation, but was interested in several companies and went into town as a rule in the morning, re- turning by the 5.14 from Cannon Street every night. Mr. St. Clair is now thirty-seven years of age, is a man of temperate habits, a good husband, a very affectionate father, and a man who is popular with all who know him. I may add that his whole debts at the present moment, as far as we have been able to ascertain, amount to 88 10s., while he has 220 standing to his credit in the Capital and Counties Bank. There is no reason, therefore, to think that money troubles have been weighing upon his mind.
Last Monday Mr. Neville St. Clair went into town rather earlier than usual, remarking before he started that he had two important commissions to perform, and that he would bring his little boy home a box of bricks.  Now,  by  the merest chance,



his wife received a telegram upon this same Mon- day, very shortly after his departure, to the effect that a small parcel of considerable value which she had been expecting was waiting for her at the of- fices of the Aberdeen Shipping Company. Now, if you are well up in your London, you will know that the office of the company is in Fresno Street, which branches out of Upper Swandam Lane, where you found me to-night. Mrs. St. Clair had her lunch, started for the City, did some shopping, proceeded to the companys office, got her packet, and found herself at exactly 4.35 walking through Swandam Lane on her way back to the station. Have you followed me so far?
It is very clear.
If you remember, Monday was an exceedingly hot day, and Mrs. St. Clair walked slowly, glancing about in the hope of seeing a cab, as she did not like the neighbourhood in which she found herself. While she was walking in this way down Swandam Lane, she suddenly heard an ejaculation or cry, and was struck cold to see her husband looking down  at her and, as it seemed to her, beckoning to her from a second-floor window. The window was open, and she distinctly saw his face, which she describes as being terribly agitated. He waved his hands frantically to her, and then vanished from the window so suddenly that it seemed to her that he had been plucked back by some irresistible force from behind. One singular point which struck her quick feminine eye was that although he wore some dark coat, such as he had started to town in, he had on neither collar nor necktie.
Convinced that something was amiss with him, she rushed down the stepsfor the house was none other than the opium den in which you found me to-nightand running through the front room she attempted to ascend the stairs which led to the first floor. At the foot of the stairs, however, she met  this Lascar scoundrel of whom I have spoken, who thrust her back and, aided by a Dane, who acts as assistant there, pushed her out into the street. Filled with the most maddening doubts and fears, she rushed down the lane and, by rare good-fortune, met in Fresno Street a number of constables with an inspector, all on their way to their beat. The inspector and two men accompanied her back, and in spite of the continued resistance of the propri- etor, they made their way to the room in which Mr. St. Clair had last been seen. There was no sign of him there. In fact, in the whole of that floor there was no one  to  be  found  save  a  crippled  wretch of hideous aspect, who, it seems, made his home there. Both he and the Lascar stoutly swore that
no one else had been in the front room during the afternoon. So determined was their denial that the inspector was staggered, and had almost come to believe that Mrs. St. Clair had been deluded when, with a cry, she sprang at a small deal box which lay upon the table and tore the lid from it. Out there fell a cascade of childrens bricks. It was the toy which he had promised to bring home.
This discovery, and the evident confusion which the cripple showed, made the inspector re- alise that the matter was serious. The rooms were carefully examined, and results all pointed to an abominable crime. The front room was plainly furnished as a sitting-room and led into a small bedroom, which looked out upon the back of one of the wharves. Between the wharf and the bed- room window is a narrow strip,  which is dry at  low tide but is covered at high tide with at least four and a half feet of water. The bedroom window was a broad one and opened from below. On ex- amination traces of blood were to be seen upon the windowsill, and several scattered drops were visi- ble upon the wooden floor of the bedroom. Thrust away behind a curtain in the front room were all the clothes of Mr. Neville St. Clair, with the excep- tion of his coat. His boots, his socks, his hat, and his watchall were there. There were no signs of violence upon any of these garments, and there were no other traces of Mr.  Neville St. Clair.  Out  of the window he must apparently have gone for  no other exit could be discovered, and the ominous bloodstains upon the sill gave little promise that he could save himself by swimming, for the tide was  at its very highest at the moment of the tragedy.
And now as to the villains who seemed to be immediately implicated in the matter. The Lascar was known to be a man of the vilest antecedents, but as, by  Mrs.  St.  Clairs  story,  he  was  known to have been at the foot of the stair within a very few seconds of her husbands appearance at the window, he could hardly have been more than an accessory to the crime. His defence was one of absolute ignorance, and he protested that he had no knowledge as to the doings of Hugh Boone, his lodger, and that he could not account in any way for the presence of the missing gentlemans clothes.
So much for the Lascar manager. Now for the sinister cripple who lives upon the second floor of the opium den, and who was certainly the last hu- man being whose eyes rested upon Neville St. Clair. His name is Hugh Boone, and his hideous face is one which is familiar to every man who goes much to the City. He is a professional beggar, though in order to avoid the police regulations he pretends



to a small trade in wax vestas. Some little distance down Threadneedle Street, upon the left-hand side, there is, as you may have remarked, a small angle in the wall. Here it is that this creature takes his daily seat, cross-legged with his tiny stock of matches  on his lap, and as he is a piteous spectacle a small rain of charity descends into the greasy leather cap which lies upon the pavement beside him. I have watched the fellow more than once before ever I thought of making his professional acquaintance, and I have been surprised at the harvest which he has reaped in a short time. His appearance, you see, is so remarkable that no one can pass him without observing him. A shock of orange hair, a pale face disfigured by a horrible scar, which, by its contrac- tion,  has turned up the outer edge of his upper  lip, a bulldog chin, and a pair of very penetrating dark eyes, which present a singular contrast to the colour of his hair, all mark him out from amid the common crowd of mendicants and so, too,  does his wit, for he is ever ready with a reply to any piece of chaff which may be thrown at him by the passers-by. This is the man whom we now learn to have been the lodger at the opium den, and to have been the last man to see the gentleman of whom we are in quest.
But a cripple! said I. What could he have done single-handed against a man in the prime of life?
He is a cripple in the sense that he walks with a limp; but in other respects he appears to be a pow- erful and well-nurtured man. Surely your medical experience would tell you, Watson, that weakness in one limb is often compensated for by exceptional strength in the others.
Pray continue your narrative.
Mrs. St. Clair had fainted at the sight of the blood upon the window, and she was escorted home in a cab by the police, as her presence could be of no help to them in their investigations. Inspec- tor Barton, who had charge of the case, made a very careful examination of the premises, but without finding anything which threw any light upon the matter. One mistake had been made in not arresting Boone instantly, as he was allowed some few min- utes during which he might have communicated with his friend the Lascar, but this fault was soon remedied, and he was seized and searched, with- out anything being found which could incriminate him. There were, it is true, some blood-stains upon his right shirt-sleeve, but he pointed to his ring- finger, which had been cut near the nail, and ex- plained that the bleeding came from there, adding that he had been to the window not long before,
and that the stains which had been observed there came doubtless from the same source. He denied strenuously having ever seen Mr. Neville St. Clair and swore that the presence of the clothes in his room was as much a mystery to him as to the police. As to Mrs. St. Clairs assertion  that  she had actually seen her husband at the window, he declared that she must have been either mad or dreaming. He was removed, loudly protesting, to the police-station, while the inspector remained upon the premises in the hope that the ebbing tide might afford some fresh clue.
And it did, though they hardly  found  upon the mud-bank what they had feared to find. It was Neville St. Clairs coat, and not Neville St. Clair, which lay uncovered as the tide receded. And what do you think they found in the pockets?
I cannot imagine.
No, I dont think you would guess. Every pocket stuffed with pennies and half-pennies421 pennies and 270 half-pennies. It was no wonder that it had not been swept away by the tide. But a human body is a different matter. There is a fierce eddy between the wharf and the house. It seemed likely enough that the weighted coat had remained when the stripped body had been sucked away into the river.
But I understand that all the other clothes were found in the room. Would the body be dressed in  a coat alone?
No, sir, but the facts might be met speciously enough. Suppose that this man Boone had thrust Neville St. Clair through the window, there is no human eye which could have seen the deed. What would he do then? It would of course instantly strike him that he must get rid of the tell-tale gar- ments. He would seize the coat, then, and be in the act of throwing it out, when it would occur to him that it would swim and not sink. He has little time, for he has heard the scuffle downstairs when the wife tried to force her way up, and perhaps he has already heard from his Lascar confederate that the police are hurrying up the street. There is not an instant to be lost. He rushes to some secret hoard, where he has accumulated the fruits of his beggary, and he stuffs all the coins upon which he can lay his hands into the pockets to make sure of the coats sinking. He throws it out, and would have  done  the same with the other garments had not he heard the rush of steps below, and only just had time to close the window when the police appeared.
It certainly sounds feasible.
Well, we will take it as a working hypothesis for want of a better. Boone, as I have told you, was



arrested and taken to the station, but it could not be shown that there had ever before been anything against him. He had for years been known as a professional beggar, but his life appeared to have been a very quiet and innocent one. There the mat- ter stands at present, and the questions which have to be solvedwhat Neville St. Clair was doing in the opium den, what happened to him when there, where is he now, and what Hugh Boone had to do with his disappearanceare all as far from a solution as ever. I confess that I cannot recall any case within my experience which looked at the first glance so simple and yet which presented such difficulties.
While Sherlock Holmes had been detailing this singular series of events, we had been whirling through the outskirts of the great town until the last straggling houses had been left behind, and  we rattled along with a country hedge upon either side of us. Just as he finished, however, we drove through two scattered villages, where a few lights still glimmered in the windows.
We are on the outskirts of Lee, said my com- panion. We have touched on three English coun- ties in our short drive, starting in Middlesex, pass- ing over an angle of Surrey, and ending in Kent.  See that light among the trees? That is The Cedars, and beside that lamp sits a woman whose anxious ears have already, I have little doubt, caught the clink of our horses feet.
But why are you not conducting the case from Baker Street? I asked.
Because there are many inquiries which must be made out here. Mrs. St. Clair has most kindly put two rooms at my disposal, and you may rest assured that she will have nothing but a welcome for my friend and colleague. I hate to meet her, Watson, when I have no news of her husband. Here we are. Whoa, there, whoa!
We had pulled up in front of a large villa which stood within its own grounds. A stable-boy had run out to the horses head, and springing down, I fol- lowed Holmes up the small, winding gravel-drive which led to the house. As we approached,  the door flew open, and a little blonde woman stood in the opening, clad in some sort of light mousseline de soie, with a touch of fluffy pink chiffon at her neck and wrists. She stood with her figure outlined against the flood of light, one hand upon the door, one half-raised in her eagerness, her body slightly bent, her head and face protruded, with eager eyes and parted lips, a standing question.
Well? she cried, well? And then, seeing that there were two of us, she gave a cry of hope which
sank into a groan as she saw that my companion shook his head and shrugged his shoulders.
No good news? None.
No bad?
No.
Thank God for that. But come in. You must be weary, for you have had a long day.
This is my friend, Dr. Watson. He has been of most vital use to me in several of my cases, and a lucky chance has made it possible for me to bring him out and associate him with this investigation.
I am delighted to see you, said she, pressing my hand warmly. You will, I am sure, forgive anything that may be wanting in our arrangements, when you consider the blow which has come so suddenly upon us.
My dear madam, said I, I am an old cam- paigner, and if I were not I can very well see that  no apology is needed. If I can be of any assistance, either to you or to my friend here, I shall be indeed happy.
Now, Mr. Sherlock Holmes, said the lady as we entered a well-lit dining-room, upon the table of which a cold supper had been laid out, I should very much like to ask you one or two plain ques- tions, to which I beg that you will give a plain answer.
Certainly, madam.
Do not trouble about my feelings. I am not hysterical, nor given to fainting. I simply wish to hear your real, real opinion.
Upon what point?
In your heart of hearts, do you think that Neville is alive?
Sherlock Holmes seemed to be embarrassed by the question. Frankly, now! she repeated, stand- ing upon the rug and looking keenly down at him as he leaned back in a basket-chair.
Frankly, then, madam, I do not. You think that he is dead?
I do. Murdered?
I dont say that. Perhaps.
And on what day did he meet his death? On Monday.
Then perhaps, Mr. Holmes, you will be good enough to explain how it is that I have received a letter from him to-day.
Sherlock Holmes sprang out of his chair as if he had been galvanised.



What! he roared.
Yes, to-day. She stood smiling, holding up a little slip of paper in the air.
May I see it? Certainly.
He snatched it from her in his eagerness, and smoothing it out upon the table he drew over the lamp and examined it intently. I had left my chair and was gazing at it over his shoulder. The enve- lope was a very coarse one and was stamped with the Gravesend postmark and with the date of that very day, or rather of the day before, for it was considerably after midnight.
Coarse writing, murmured Holmes. Surely this is not your husbands writing, madam.
No, but the enclosure is.
I perceive also that whoever addressed the en- velope had to go and inquire as to the address.
How can you tell that?
The name, you see, is in perfectly black ink, which has dried itself. The rest is of the greyish colour, which shows that blotting-paper has been used. If it had been written straight off, and then blotted, none would be of a deep black shade. This man has written the name, and there has then been a pause before he wrote the address, which can only mean that he was not familiar with it. It is, of course, a trifle, but there is nothing so important as trifles. Let us now see the letter. Ha! there has been an enclosure here!
Yes, there was a ring. His signet-ring.
And you are sure that this is your husbands hand?
One of his hands. One?
His hand when he wrote hurriedly. It is very unlike his usual writing, and yet I know it well.
Dearest do not be frightened. All will come well. There is a huge error which it may take some little time to rectify. Wait in patience.
 Neville.
Written in pencil upon the fly-leaf of a book, octavo size, no water-mark.  Hum!  Posted to-day in Gravesend by a man with a dirty thumb. Ha! And the flap has been gummed, if I am not very much in error, by a person who had been chewing tobacco. And you have no doubt that it is your husbands hand, madam?
None. Neville wrote those words.
And they were posted to-day at Gravesend. Well, Mrs. St. Clair, the clouds lighten, though I should not venture to say that the danger is over.
But he must be alive, Mr. Holmes.
Unless this is a clever forgery to put us on the wrong scent. The ring, after all, proves nothing. It may have been taken from him.
No, no; it is, it is his  very  own  writing! Very well. It may, however, have been written
on Monday and only posted to-day. That is possible.
If so, much may have happened between.
Oh, you must not discourage me, Mr. Holmes. I know that all is well  with him.  There is so keen   a sympathy between us that I should know if evil came upon him. On the very day that I saw him  last he cut himself in the bedroom,  and yet  I in  the dining-room rushed upstairs instantly with the utmost certainty that something had happened. Do you think that I would respond to such a trifle and yet be ignorant of his death?
I have seen too much not to know that the im- pression of a woman may be more valuable than the conclusion of an analytical reasoner. And in this letter you certainly have a very strong piece of evidence to corroborate your view. But if your hus- band is alive and able to write letters, why should he remain away from you?
I cannot imagine. It is unthinkable.
And on Monday he made no remarks before leaving you?
No.
And you were surprised to see him in Swan- dam Lane?
Very much so.
Was the window open? Yes.
Then he might have called to you? He might.
He only, as I understand, gave an inarticulate cry?
Yes.
A call for help, you thought? Yes. He waved his hands.
But it might have been a cry of surprise. As- tonishment at the unexpected sight of you might cause him to throw up his hands?
It is possible.
And you thought he was pulled back? He disappeared so suddenly.



He might have leaped back. You did not see anyone else in the room?
No, but this horrible man confessed to having been there, and the Lascar was at the foot of the stairs.
Quite so. Your husband, as far as you could see, had his ordinary clothes on?
But without his collar or tie. I distinctly saw his bare throat.
Had he ever spoken of Swandam Lane? Never.
Had he ever showed any signs of having taken opium?
Never.
Thank you, Mrs. St. Clair. Those are the prin- cipal points about which I wished to be absolutely clear. We shall now have a little supper and then retire, for we may have a very busy day to-morrow.
A large and comfortable double-bedded room had been placed at our disposal, and I was quickly between the sheets, for I was weary after my night of adventure. Sherlock Holmes was a man, how- ever, who, when he had an unsolved problem upon his mind, would go for days, and even for a week, without rest, turning it over, rearranging his facts, looking at it from every point of view until he had either fathomed it or convinced himself that his data were insufficient. It was soon evident to me that he was now preparing for an all-night sitting. He took off his coat and waistcoat, put on a large blue dressing-gown, and then wandered about the room collecting pillows from his bed and cush- ions from the sofa and armchairs. With these he constructed a sort of Eastern divan, upon which  he perched himself cross-legged,  with  an  ounce of shag tobacco and a box of matches laid out in front of him. In the dim light of the lamp I saw  him sitting there, an old briar pipe between his lips, his eyes fixed vacantly upon the corner of the ceiling, the blue smoke curling up from him, silent, motionless, with the light shining upon his strong- set aquiline features.   So he sat as I dropped off   to sleep, and so he sat when a sudden ejaculation caused me to wake up, and I found the summer sun shining into the apartment. The pipe was still between his lips, the smoke still curled upward, and the room was full of a dense tobacco haze, but nothing remained of the heap of shag which I had seen upon the previous night.
Awake, Watson? he asked. Yes.
Game for a morning drive?
Certainly.
Then dress. No one is stirring yet, but I know where the stable-boy sleeps, and we shall soon have the trap out. He chuckled to himself as he spoke, his eyes twinkled, and he seemed a different man to the sombre thinker of the previous night.
As I dressed I glanced at my watch. It was no wonder that no one was stirring. It was twenty-  five minutes past four. I had hardly finished when Holmes returned with the news that the boy was putting in the horse.
I want to test a little theory of mine, said he, pulling on his boots. I think, Watson, that you are now standing in the presence of one of the most absolute fools in Europe. I deserve to be kicked from here to Charing Cross. But I think I have the key of the affair now.
And where is it? I asked, smiling.
In the bathroom, he answered. Oh, yes,  I  am not joking, he continued, seeing my look of in- credulity. I have just been there, and I have taken it out, and I have got it in this Gladstone bag. Come on, my boy, and we shall see whether it will not fit the lock.
We made our way downstairs as quietly as pos- sible, and out into the bright morning sunshine. In the road stood our horse and trap, with the half- clad stable-boy waiting at the head. We both sprang in, and away  we  dashed down the London Road.  A few country carts were stirring, bearing in veg- etables to the metropolis, but the lines of villas on either side were as silent and lifeless as some city in a dream.
It has been in some points a singular case, said Holmes, flicking the horse on into a gallop. I confess that I have been as blind as a mole, but it is better to learn wisdom late than never to learn it at all.
In town the earliest risers were just beginning to look sleepily from their windows as we drove through the streets of the Surrey side. Passing down the Waterloo Bridge Road we crossed over the river, and dashing up Wellington Street wheeled sharply to the right and found ourselves in Bow Street. Sherlock Holmes was well known to the force, and the two constables at the door saluted him. One of them held the horses head while the other led us in.
Who is on duty? asked Holmes. Inspector Bradstreet, sir.
Ah, Bradstreet, how are you? A tall, stout of- ficial had come down the stone-flagged passage, in a peaked cap and frogged jacket.  I wish to have    a quiet word with you, Bradstreet. Certainly, Mr.



Holmes. Step into my room here. It was a small, office-like room, with a huge ledger upon the ta- ble, and a telephone projecting from the wall. The inspector sat down at his desk.
What can I do for you, Mr. Holmes?
I called about that beggarman, Boonethe one who was charged with being concerned in the dis- appearance of Mr. Neville St. Clair, of Lee.
Yes. He was brought up and remanded for further inquiries.
So I heard. You have him here? In the cells.
Is  he quiet?
Oh, he gives no trouble. But he is a dirty scoundrel.
Dirty?
Yes, it is all we can do to make him wash his hands, and his face is as black as a tinkers. Well, when once his case has been settled, he will have    a regular prison bath; and I think, if you saw him, you would agree with me that he needed it.
I should like to see him very much.
Would you? That is easily done. Come this way. You can leave your bag.
No, I think that Ill take it.
Very  good.  Come  this  way,  if  you  please. He led us down a passage, opened a barred door, passed down a winding stair, and brought us to a whitewashed corridor with a line of doors on each side.
The third on the right is his, said the inspec- tor. Here it is! He quietly shot back a panel in  the upper part of the door and glanced through.
He is asleep, said he. You can see him very well.
We both put our eyes to the grating. The pris- oner lay with his face towards us, in a very deep sleep, breathing slowly and heavily. He was a middle-sized man, coarsely clad as became his call- ing, with a coloured shirt protruding through the rent in his tattered coat. He was,  as the inspec-  tor had said, extremely dirty, but the grime which covered his face could not conceal its repulsive ug- liness. A broad wheal from an old scar ran right across it from eye to chin, and by its contraction had turned up one side of the upper lip, so that three teeth were exposed in a perpetual snarl. A shock of very bright red hair grew low over  his eyes and forehead.
Hes a beauty, isnt he? said the inspector.
He certainly needs a wash, remarked Holmes. I had an idea that he might, and I took the lib- erty of bringing the tools with me. He opened the Gladstone bag as he spoke, and took out, to my astonishment, a very large bath-sponge.
He! he! You are a funny one, chuckled the inspector.
Now, if you will have the great goodness to open that door very quietly, we will soon make him cut a much more respectable figure.
Well, I dont know why not, said the inspector. He doesnt look a credit to the Bow Street cells, does he? He slipped his key into the lock, and we all very quietly entered the cell. The sleeper half turned, and then settled down once more into a deep slumber. Holmes stooped to the water-jug, moistened his sponge, and then rubbed it twice vigorously across and down the prisoners face.
Let me introduce you, he shouted, to Mr.
Neville St. Clair, of Lee, in the county of Kent.
Never in my life have I seen such a sight. The mans face peeled off under the sponge like the bark from a tree. Gone was the coarse brown tint! Gone, too, was the horrid scar which had seamed  it across, and the twisted lip which had given the repulsive sneer to the face! A twitch brought away the tangled red hair, and there, sitting up in his bed, was a pale, sad-faced, refined-looking man, black- haired and smooth-skinned, rubbing his eyes and staring about him with sleepy bewilderment. Then suddenly realising the exposure, he broke into a scream and threw himself down with his face to the pillow.
Great heavens! cried the inspector, it is, in- deed, the missing man. I know him from the pho- tograph.
The prisoner turned with the reckless air of a man who abandons himself to his destiny. Be it so, said he. And pray what am I charged with?
With making away with Mr. Neville St.Oh, come, you cant be charged with that unless they make a case of attempted suicide of it, said the inspector with a grin. Well, I have been twenty- seven years in the force, but this really takes the cake.
If I am Mr. Neville St. Clair, then it is obvi-  ous that no crime has been committed, and that, therefore, I am illegally detained.
No crime, but a very great error has been com- mitted, said Holmes. You would have done better to have trusted your wife.
It was not the wife; it was the children, groaned the prisoner. God help me, I would not



have them ashamed of their father. My God! What an exposure! What can I do?
Sherlock Holmes sat down beside him on the couch and patted him kindly on the shoulder.
If you leave it to a court of law to clear the mat- ter up, said he, of course you can hardly avoid publicity. On the other hand, if you convince the po- lice authorities that there is no possible case against you, I do not know that there is any reason that  the details should find their way into the papers. Inspector Bradstreet would, I am sure, make notes upon anything which you might tell us and submit it to the proper authorities. The case would then never go into court at all.
God bless you! cried the prisoner passionately. I would have endured imprisonment, ay, even exe- cution, rather than have left my miserable secret as a family blot to my children.
You are the first who have ever  heard  my story. My father was a schoolmaster in Chesterfield, where I received an excellent education. I travelled in my youth, took to the stage, and finally became a reporter on an evening paper in London. One  day my editor wished to have a series of articles upon begging in the metropolis, and I volunteered to supply them. There was the point from which  all my adventures started. It was only by trying begging as an amateur that I could get the facts upon which to base my articles. When an actor I had, of course, learned all the secrets of making up, and had been famous in the green-room for my skill. I took advantage now of my attainments. I painted my face,  and to make myself as pitiable   as possible I made a good scar and fixed one side of my lip in a twist by the aid of a small slip of flesh-coloured plaster. Then with a red head of hair, and an appropriate dress, I took my station in the business part of the city, ostensibly as a match-seller but really as a beggar. For seven hours I plied my trade,  and when I returned home in the evening    I found to my surprise that I had received no less than 26s. 4d.
I wrote my articles and thought little more of the matter until, some time later, I backed a bill for a friend and had a writ served upon me for 25. I was  at my wits end where to get the money,  but   a sudden idea came to me. I begged a fortnights grace from the creditor, asked for a holiday from my employers, and spent the time in begging in the City under my disguise. In ten days I had the money and had paid the debt.
Well, you can imagine how hard it was to settle down to arduous work at 2 a week when I knew that I could earn as much in a day by smearing
my face with a little paint, laying my cap on the ground, and sitting still. It was a long fight between my pride and the money, but the dollars won at last, and I threw up reporting and sat day after day in the corner which I had first chosen, inspiring pity by my ghastly face and filling my pockets with coppers. Only one man knew my secret. He was the keeper of a low den in which I used to lodge   in Swandam Lane, where I could every morning emerge as a squalid beggar and in the evenings transform myself into a well-dressed man about town. This fellow, a Lascar, was well paid by  me  for his rooms, so that I knew that my secret was safe in his possession.
Well, very soon I found that I was saving con- siderable sums of money. I do not mean that any beggar in the streets of London could earn 700 a yearwhich is less than my average takingsbut I had exceptional advantages in my power of mak- ing up, and also in a facility of repartee, which improved by practice and made me quite a recog- nised character in the City. All day a stream of pennies, varied by silver, poured in upon me, and  it was a very bad day in which I failed to take 2.
As I grew richer I grew more ambitious, took  a house in the country, and eventually married, without anyone having a suspicion as to my real occupation. My dear wife knew that I had business in the City. She little knew what.
Last Monday I had finished for the day and was dressing in my room above the opium den when I looked out of my window and saw, to my horror and astonishment, that my wife was stand- ing in the street, with her eyes  fixed full upon me.  I gave a cry of surprise, threw up my arms to cover my face, and, rushing to my confidant, the Lascar, entreated him to prevent anyone from coming up to me. I heard her voice downstairs, but I knew that she could not ascend. Swiftly I threw off my clothes, pulled on those of a beggar, and put on my pigments and wig. Even a wifes eyes could not pierce so complete a disguise. But then it occurred to me that there might be a search in the room, and that the clothes might betray me. I threw open the window, reopening by my violence a small cut which I had inflicted upon myself in the bedroom that morning. Then I seized my coat, which was weighted by the coppers which I had just trans- ferred to it from the leather bag in which I carried my takings. I hurled it out of the window, and it disappeared into the Thames. The other clothes would have followed, but at that moment there was a rush of constables up the stair, and a few minutes after I found, rather, I confess, to my relief, that



instead of being identified as Mr. Neville St. Clair, I was arrested as his murderer.
I do not know that there is anything else for me to explain. I was determined to preserve my dis- guise as long as possible, and hence my preference for a dirty face. Knowing that my wife would be terribly anxious, I slipped off my ring and confided it to the Lascar at a moment when no constable was watching me, together with a hurried scrawl, telling her that she had no cause to fear.
That note only reached her yesterday, said Holmes.
Good God! What a week she must have spent!
The police have watched this Lascar, said In- spector Bradstreet, and I can quite understand that he might find it difficult to post a letter unobserved. Probably he handed it to some sailor customer of his, who forgot all about it for some days.
That was it, said Holmes, nodding approv- ingly; I have no doubt of it. But have you never been prosecuted for begging?
Many times; but what was a fine to me?
It must stop here, however, said Bradstreet. If the police are to hush this thing up, there must be no more of Hugh Boone.
I have sworn it by the most solemn oaths which a man can take.
In that case I think that it is probable that no further steps may be taken. But if you are found again, then all must come out. I am sure, Mr. Holmes, that we are very much indebted to you for having cleared the matter up. I wish I knew how you reach your results.
I reached this one, said my friend, by sitting upon five pillows and consuming an ounce of shag. I think, Watson, that if we drive to Baker Street we shall just be in time for breakfast.





























The Adventure of the Blue Carbuncle





I
had called upon my friend Sherlock Holmes upon the second morning after Christmas, with the intention of wishing him the compliments of the season. He
was lounging upon the sofa in a purple dressing- gown, a pipe-rack within his reach upon the right, and a pile of crumpled morning papers, evidently newly studied, near at hand. Beside the couch was a wooden chair, and on the angle of the back hung a very seedy and disreputable hard-felt hat, much the worse for wear, and cracked in several places. A lens and a forceps lying upon the seat of the chair suggested that the hat had been suspended in this manner for the purpose of examination.
You are engaged, said I; perhaps I interrupt you.
Not at all. I am glad to have a friend with whom I can discuss my results. The matter is a perfectly trivial onehe jerked his thumb in the direction of the old hatbut there are points in connection with it which are not entirely devoid of interest and even of instruction.
I seated myself in his armchair and warmed my hands before his crackling fire, for a sharp frost had set in, and the windows were thick with the  ice crystals. I suppose, I remarked, that, homely as it looks, this thing has some deadly story linked on to itthat it is the clue which will guide you in the solution of some mystery and the punishment of some crime.
No, no. No crime, said Sherlock Holmes, laughing. Only one of those whimsical little in- cidents which will happen when you have four million human beings all jostling each other within the space of a few square miles. Amid the action and reaction of so dense a swarm of humanity, ev- ery possible combination of events may be expected to take place, and many a little problem will be pre- sented which may be striking and bizarre without being criminal. We have already had experience of such.
So much so, I remarked, that of the last six cases which I have added to my notes, three have been entirely free of any legal crime.
Precisely. You allude to my attempt to recover the Irene Adler papers, to the singular case of Miss Mary Sutherland, and to the adventure of the man with the twisted lip. Well, I have  no  doubt  that this small matter will fall into the same innocent category. You know Peterson, the commissionaire?
Yes.
It is to him that this trophy belongs. It is his hat.
No, no, he found it. Its owner is unknown. I beg that you will look upon it not as a battered billycock but as an intellectual problem. And, first, as to how it came here. It arrived upon Christmas morning, in company with a good fat goose, which is, I have no doubt, roasting at this moment in front of Petersons fire. The facts are these: about four oclock on Christmas morning, Peterson, who, as you know, is a very honest fellow, was returning from some small jollification and was making his way homeward down Tottenham Court Road. In front of him he saw, in the gaslight, a tallish man, walking with a slight stagger, and carrying a white goose slung over his shoulder. As he reached the corner of Goodge Street, a row broke out between this stranger and a little knot of roughs. One of the latter knocked off the mans hat, on which he raised his stick to defend himself and, swinging it over his head, smashed the shop window behind him. Pe- terson had rushed forward to protect the stranger from his assailants; but the man, shocked at having broken the window, and seeing an official-looking person in uniform rushing towards him, dropped his goose, took to his heels, and vanished amid the labyrinth of small streets which lie at the back of Tottenham Court Road. The roughs had also fled  at the appearance of Peterson, so that he was left  in possession of the field of battle, and also of the spoils of victory in the shape of this battered hat and a most unimpeachable Christmas goose.
Which surely he restored to their owner? My dear fellow, there lies the problem. It is
true that For Mrs. Henry Baker was printed upon a small card which was tied to the birds left leg, and it is also true that the initials H. B. are legible upon the lining of this hat, but as there are some thousands of Bakers, and some hundreds of Henry Bakers in this city of ours, it is not easy to restore lost property to any one of them.
What, then, did Peterson do?
He brought round both hat and goose to me on Christmas morning, knowing that even the small- est problems are of interest to me. The goose we retained until this morning, when there were signs that, in spite of the slight frost, it would be well that it should be eaten without unnecessary delay. Its finder has carried it off, therefore, to fulfil the ultimate destiny of a goose, while I continue to retain the hat of the unknown gentleman who lost his Christmas dinner.
Did he not advertise? No.
Then, what clue could you have as to his iden- tity?



Only as much as we can deduce. From his hat?
Precisely.
But you are joking. What can you gather from this old battered felt?
Here is my lens. You know my methods. What can you gather yourself as to the individuality of the man who has worn this article?
I took the tattered object in my hands and turned it over rather ruefully. It was a very ordinary black hat of the usual round shape, hard and much the worse for wear. The lining had been of red silk, but was a good deal discoloured. There was no makers name; but, as Holmes had remarked, the initials H. B. were scrawled upon one side.  It  was pierced in the brim for a hat-securer, but the elastic was missing. For the rest, it was cracked, exceedingly dusty, and spotted in several places, although there seemed to have been some attempt to hide the discoloured patches by smearing them with ink.
I can see nothing, said I, handing it back to my friend.
On the contrary, Watson, you can see every- thing. You fail, however, to reason from what you see. You are too timid in drawing your inferences.
Then, pray tell me what it is that you can infer from this hat?
He picked it up and gazed at it in the peculiar introspective fashion which was characteristic of him. It is perhaps less suggestive than it might have been, he remarked, and yet there are a few inferences which are very distinct, and a few others which represent at least a strong balance of prob- ability. That the man was highly intellectual is of course obvious upon the face of it,  and also that  he was fairly well-to-do within the last three years, although he has now fallen upon evil days. He had foresight, but has less now than formerly, pointing to a moral retrogression, which, when taken with the decline of his fortunes, seems to indicate some evil influence, probably drink, at work upon him. This may account also for the obvious fact that his wife has ceased to love him.
My dear Holmes!
He has, however, retained some degree of self- respect, he continued, disregarding my remon- strance. He is a man who leads a sedentary life, goes out little, is out of training entirely, is middle- aged, has grizzled hair which he has had cut within the last few days, and which he anoints with lime- cream. These are the more patent facts which are
to be deduced from his hat. Also, by the way, that  it is extremely improbable that he has gas laid on in his house.
You are certainly joking, Holmes.
Not in the least. Is it possible that even now, when I give you these results, you are unable to see how they are attained?
I have no doubt that I am very stupid, but I must confess that I am unable to follow you. For example, how did you deduce that this man was intellectual?
For answer Holmes clapped the hat upon his head. It came right over the forehead and settled upon the bridge of his nose. It is a question of cubic capacity, said he; a man with so large a brain must have something in it.
The decline of his fortunes, then?
This hat is three years old. These flat brims curled at the edge came in then. It is a hat of the very best quality. Look at the band of ribbed silk and the excellent lining. If this man could afford  to buy so expensive a hat three years ago, and has had no hat since, then he has assuredly gone down in the world.
Well, that is clear enough, certainly. But how about the foresight and the moral retrogression?
Sherlock Holmes laughed. Here is the fore- sight, said he putting his finger upon the little disc and loop of the hat-securer. They are never sold upon hats. If this man ordered one, it is a sign of a certain amount of foresight, since he went out of his way to take this precaution against the wind. But since we see that he has broken the elastic and has not troubled to replace it, it is obvious that he has less foresight now than formerly, which is a distinct proof of a weakening nature. On the other hand,  he has endeavoured to conceal some of these stains upon the felt by daubing them with ink, which is a sign that he has not entirely lost his self-respect.
Your reasoning is certainly plausible.
The further points, that he is middle-aged, that his hair is grizzled, that it has been recently cut, and that he uses lime-cream, are all to be gathered from a close examination of the lower part of the lin- ing. The lens discloses a large number of hair-ends, clean cut by the scissors of the barber. They all ap- pear to be adhesive, and there is a distinct odour of lime-cream. This dust, you will observe, is not the gritty, grey dust of the street but the fluffy brown dust of the house, showing that it has been hung up indoors most of the time, while the marks of moisture upon the inside are proof positive that the wearer perspired very freely, and could therefore, hardly be in the best of training.



But his wifeyou said that she had ceased to love him.
This hat has not been brushed for weeks. When I see you, my dear Watson, with a weeks ac- cumulation of dust upon your hat, and when your wife allows you to go out in such a state, I shall  fear that you also have been unfortunate enough to lose your wifes affection.
But he might be a bachelor.
Nay, he was bringing home the goose as a peace-offering to his wife. Remember the card upon the birds leg.
You have an answer to everything. But how on earth do you deduce that the gas is not laid on in his house?
One tallow stain, or even two, might come by chance; but when I see no less than five, I think that there can be little doubt that the individual must be brought into frequent contact with burn- ing tallowwalks upstairs at night probably with his hat in one hand and a guttering candle in the other. Anyhow, he never got tallow-stains from a gas-jet. Are you satisfied?
Well, it is very ingenious, said I, laughing; but since, as you said just now, there has been no crime committed, and no harm done save the loss of a goose, all this seems to be rather a waste of energy.
Sherlock Holmes had opened his mouth to re- ply, when the door flew open, and Peterson, the commissionaire, rushed into the apartment with flushed cheeks and the face of a man who is dazed with astonishment.
The goose, Mr. Holmes! The goose, sir! he gasped.
Eh? What  of  it,  then?  Has  it  returned  to life and flapped off through the kitchen window? Holmes twisted himself round upon the sofa to get a fairer view of the mans excited face.
See here, sir! See what my wife found in its crop! He held out his hand and displayed upon the centre of the palm a brilliantly scintillating blue stone, rather smaller than a bean in size, but of such purity and radiance that it twinkled like an electric point in the dark hollow of his hand.
Sherlock Holmes sat up with a whistle. By Jove, Peterson! said he, this is treasure trove indeed. I suppose you know what you have got?
A diamond, sir? A precious stone. It cuts into glass as though it were putty.
Its more than a precious stone. It is the pre- cious stone.
Not the Countess of Morcars blue carbuncle! I ejaculated.
Precisely so. I ought to know its size and shape, seeing that I have  read  the  advertisement  about it in The Times every day lately. It is absolutely unique, and its value can only be conjectured, but the reward offered of 1000 is certainly not within a twentieth part of the market price.
A thousand pounds! Great Lord of mercy! The commissionaire plumped down into a chair and stared from one to the other of us.
That is the reward, and I have reason to know that there are sentimental considerations in the background which would induce the Countess to part with half her fortune if she could but recover the gem.
It was lost, if I remember aright, at the Hotel Cosmopolitan, I remarked.
Precisely so, on December 22nd, just five days ago. John Horner, a plumber, was accused of hav- ing abstracted it from the ladys jewel-case. The evidence against him was so strong that the case has been referred to the Assizes. I have some ac- count of the matter here, I believe. He rummaged amid his newspapers, glancing over the dates, until at last he smoothed one out, doubled it over, and read the following paragraph:
Hotel Cosmopolitan Jewel Robbery. John Horner, 26, plumber, was brought up upon the charge of having upon the 22nd inst. abstracted from the jewel-case of the Count- ess of Morcar the valuable gem known as the blue carbuncle. James Ryder, upper- attendant at the hotel,  gave his evidence  to the effect that he  had  shown  Horner up to the dressing-room of the Countess   of Morcar upon the day of the robbery in order that he might solder the second bar of the grate, which was loose. He had re- mained with Horner some little time, but had finally been called away. On return- ing, he found that Horner had disappeared, that the bureau had been forced open, and that the small morocco casket in which, as it afterwards transpired, the Countess was accustomed to keep her jewel, was lying empty upon the dressing-table. Ryder in- stantly gave the alarm, and Horner was ar- rested the same evening; but the stone could not be found either upon his person or in his rooms. Catherine Cusack, maid to the Countess, deposed to having heard Ryders cry of dismay on discovering the robbery, and to having rushed into the room, where



she found matters as described by the last witness. Inspector Bradstreet, B division, gave evidence as to the arrest of Horner, who struggled frantically, and protested his innocence in the strongest terms. Evidence of a previous conviction for robbery having been given against the prisoner, the magis- trate refused to deal summarily with the of- fence, but referred it to the Assizes. Horner, who had shown signs of intense emotion during the proceedings, fainted away at the conclusion and was carried out of court.
Hum! So much for the police-court, said Holmes thoughtfully, tossing aside the paper. The ques- tion for us now to solve is the sequence of events leading from a rifled jewel-case at one end to the crop of a goose in Tottenham Court Road at the other. You see, Watson, our little deductions have suddenly assumed a much more important and less innocent aspect. Here is the stone; the stone came from the goose, and the goose came from Mr. Henry Baker, the gentleman with the bad hat and all the other characteristics with which I have bored you. So now we must set ourselves very seriously  to finding this gentleman and ascertaining what part he has played in this little mystery. To do this, we must try the simplest means first, and these lie undoubtedly in an advertisement in all the evening papers. If this fail, I shall have recourse to other methods.
What will you say?
Give me a pencil and that slip of paper. Now, then: Found at the corner of Goodge Street, a goose and a black felt hat. Mr. Henry Baker can have the same by applying at 6.30 this evening at 221b, Baker Street. That is clear and concise.
Very. But will he see it?
Well, he is sure to keep an eye on the papers, since, to a poor man, the loss was a heavy one. He was clearly so scared by his mischance in breaking the window and by the approach of Peterson that he thought of nothing but flight,  but since then   he must have bitterly regretted the impulse which caused him to drop his bird. Then, again, the in- troduction of his name will cause him to see it, for everyone who knows him will direct his attention to it. Here you are, Peterson, run down to the ad- vertising agency and have this put in the evening papers.
In which, sir?
Oh, in the Globe, Star, Pall Mall, St. Jamess, Evening News, Standard, Echo, and any others that occur to you.
Very well, sir. And this stone?
Ah, yes, I shall keep the stone. Thank you. And, I say, Peterson, just buy a goose on your way back and leave it here with me, for we must have one to give to this gentleman in place of the one which your family is now devouring.
When the commissionaire had gone, Holmes took up the stone and held it against the light. Its a bonny thing, said he.  Just see how it glints  and sparkles.  Of course it is a nucleus and focus  of crime. Every good stone is. They are the devils pet baits. In the larger and older jewels every facet may stand for a bloody deed. This stone is not yet twenty years old. It was found in the banks of the Amoy River in southern China and is remarkable in having every characteristic of the carbuncle, save that it is blue in shade instead of ruby red. In spite of its youth, it has already a sinister history. There have been two murders, a vitriol-throwing, a sui- cide, and several robberies brought about for the sake of this forty-grain weight of crystallised char- coal. Who would think that so pretty a toy would be a purveyor to the gallows and the prison? Ill lock it up in my strong box now and drop a line to the Countess to say that we have it.
Do you think that this man Horner is inno- cent?
I cannot tell.
Well, then, do you imagine that this other one, Henry Baker, had anything to do with the matter?
It is, I think, much more likely that Henry Baker is an absolutely innocent man, who had no idea that the bird which he was carrying was of considerably more value than if it were made of solid gold. That, however, I shall determine by a very simple test if we have an answer to our adver- tisement.
And you can do nothing until then? Nothing.
In that case I shall continue my professional round. But I shall come back in the evening at the hour you have mentioned, for I should like to see the solution of so tangled a business.
Very glad to see you. I dine at seven.  There is a woodcock, I believe. By the way, in view of recent occurrences, perhaps I ought to ask Mrs. Hudson to examine its crop.
I had been delayed at a case, and it was a little after half-past six when I found myself in Baker Street once more. As I approached the house I saw a tall man in a Scotch bonnet with a coat which was buttoned up to his chin waiting outside in the



bright semicircle which was thrown from the fan- light. Just as I arrived the door was opened, and  we were shown up together to Holmes room.
Mr. Henry Baker, I believe, said he, rising from his armchair and greeting his visitor with the easy air of geniality which he could so readily as- sume. Pray take this chair by the fire, Mr. Baker. It is a cold night, and I observe that your circulation is more adapted for summer than for winter. Ah, Watson, you have just come at the right time. Is that your hat, Mr. Baker?
Yes, sir, that is undoubtedly my hat.
He was a large man with rounded shoulders, a massive head, and a broad, intelligent face, slop- ing down to a  pointed  beard  of  grizzled  brown. A touch of red in nose and cheeks, with a slight tremor of his extended hand, recalled Holmes sur- mise as to his habits. His rusty black frock-coat was buttoned right up in front, with the collar turned up, and his lank wrists protruded from his sleeves without a sign of cuff or shirt. He spoke in a slow staccato fashion, choosing his words with care, and gave the impression generally of a man of learning and letters who had had ill-usage at the hands of fortune.
We have retained these things for some days, said Holmes, because we expected to see an ad- vertisement from you giving your address. I am at a loss to know now why you did not advertise.
Our visitor gave a rather shamefaced laugh. Shillings have not been so plentiful with me as they once were, he remarked. I had no doubt  that the gang of roughs who assaulted me had carried off both my hat and the bird.  I did not   care to spend more money in a hopeless attempt at recovering them.
Very naturally. By the way, about the bird, we were compelled to eat it.
To eat it! Our visitor half rose from his chair in his excitement.
Yes, it would have been of no use to anyone had we not done so. But I presume that this other goose upon the sideboard, which is about the same weight and perfectly fresh, will answer your pur- pose equally well?
Oh, certainly, certainly, answered Mr. Baker with a sigh of relief.
Of course, we still have the feathers, legs, crop, and so on of your own bird, so if you wish
The man burst into a hearty laugh. They might be useful to me as relics of my adventure, said he, but beyond that I can hardly see what use the
disjecta membra of my late acquaintance are going to be to me. No, sir, I think that, with your permis- sion, I will confine my attentions to the excellent bird which I perceive upon the sideboard.
Sherlock Holmes glanced sharply across at me with a slight shrug of his shoulders.
There is your hat, then, and there your bird, said he. By the way, would it bore you to tell me where you got the other one from? I am somewhat of a fowl fancier, and I have seldom seen a better grown goose.
Certainly, sir, said Baker, who had risen and tucked his newly gained property under his arm. There are a few of us who frequent the Alpha Inn, near the Museumwe are to be found in the Mu- seum itself during the day, you understand. This year our good host, Windigate by name, instituted a goose club, by which, on consideration of some few pence every week, we were each to receive a bird at Christmas. My pence were duly paid, and the rest is familiar to you. I am much indebted to you, sir, for a Scotch bonnet is fitted neither to my years nor my gravity. With  a comical pomposity  of manner he bowed solemnly to both of us and strode off upon his way.
So much for Mr. Henry Baker, said Holmes when he had closed the door behind him. It is quite certain that he knows nothing whatever about the matter. Are you hungry, Watson?
Not particularly.
Then I suggest that we turn our dinner into a supper and follow up this clue while it is still hot.
By all means.
It was a bitter night, so we drew on our ulsters and wrapped cravats about our throats. Outside, the stars were shining coldly in a cloudless sky, and the breath of the passers-by blew out into smoke like so many pistol shots. Our footfalls rang out crisply and loudly as we swung through the doc- tors quarter, Wimpole Street, Harley Street, and so through Wigmore Street into Oxford Street. In  a quarter of an hour we were  in  Bloomsbury  at the Alpha Inn,  which is a small public-house at  the corner of one of the streets which runs down into Holborn. Holmes pushed open the door of the private bar and ordered two glasses of beer from the ruddy-faced, white-aproned landlord.
Your beer should be excellent if it is as good  as your geese, said he.
My geese! The man seemed surprised.
Yes. I was speaking only half an hour ago to Mr. Henry Baker, who was a member of your goose club.



Ah! yes, I see. But you see, sir, thems not our
geese.
Indeed! Whose, then?
Well, I got the two dozen from a salesman in Covent Garden.
Indeed? I know some of them. Which was it? Breckinridge is his name.
Ah! I dont  know  him.  Well,  heres  your good health landlord, and prosperity to your house. Good-night.
Now for Mr. Breckinridge, he continued, but- toning up his coat as we came out into the frosty air. Remember, Watson that though we have so homely a thing as a goose at one end of this chain, we have at the other a man who will certainly get seven years penal servitude unless we can estab- lish his innocence. It is possible that our inquiry may but confirm his guilt; but, in any case, we have a line of investigation which has been missed by the police, and which a singular chance has placed in our hands. Let us follow it out to the bitter end. Faces to the south, then, and quick march!
We passed across Holborn, down Endell Street, and so through a zigzag of slums to Covent Gar- den Market. One of the largest stalls bore  the name of Breckinridge upon it, and the proprietor  a horsey-looking man, with a sharp face and trim side-whiskers was helping a boy to put up the shut- ters.
Good-evening. Its a cold night, said Holmes.
The salesman nodded and shot a questioning glance at my companion.
Sold out of geese, I see, continued Holmes, pointing at the bare slabs of marble.
Let you have five hundred to-morrow morn- ing.
Thats no good.
Well, there are some on the stall with the gas- flare.
Ah, but I was recommended to you. Who by?
The landlord of the Alpha.
Oh, yes; I sent him a couple of dozen.
Fine birds they were, too. Now where did you get them from?
To my surprise the question provoked a burst of anger from the salesman.
Now, then, mister, said he, with his head cocked and his arms akimbo, what are you driv- ing at? Lets have it straight, now.
It is straight enough. I should like to know who sold you the geese which you supplied to the Alpha.
Well then, I shant tell you. So now!
Oh, it is a matter of no importance; but I dont know why you should be so warm over such a trifle.
Warm! Youd be as warm, maybe, if you were as pestered as I am. When I pay good money for a good article there should be an end of the business; but its Where are the geese? and Who did you sell the geese to? and What will you take for the geese? One would think they were the only geese in the world, to hear the fuss that is made over them.
Well, I have no connection with any other peo- ple who have been making inquiries, said Holmes carelessly.  If you wont tell us the bet is off, that  is all. But Im always ready to back my opinion on  a matter of fowls, and I have a fiver on it that the bird I ate is country bred.
Well, then, youve lost your fiver, for its town bred, snapped the salesman.
Its nothing of the kind. I say it is.
I dont believe it.
Dyou think you know more about fowls than I, who have handled them ever since I was  a nipper? I tell you, all those birds that went to the Alpha were town bred.
Youll never persuade me to believe that. Will you bet, then?
Its merely taking your money, for I know that I am right. But Ill have a sovereign on with you, just to teach you not to be obstinate.
The salesman chuckled grimly. Bring me the books, Bill, said he.
The small boy brought round a small thin vol- ume and a great greasy-backed one, laying them out together beneath the hanging lamp.
Now then, Mr. Cocksure, said the salesman, I thought that I was out of geese, but before I fin- ish youll find that there is still one left in my shop. You see this little book?
Well?
Thats the list of the folk from whom I buy. Dyou see? Well, then, here on this page are the country folk, and the numbers after their names are where their accounts are in the big ledger. Now, then! You see this other page in red ink? Well, that is a list of my town suppliers. Now, look at that third name. Just read it out to me.



Mrs. Oakshott, 117, Brixton Road249, read Holmes.
Quite so. Now turn that up in the ledger.
Holmes turned to the page indicated. Here you are, Mrs. Oakshott, 117, Brixton Road, egg and poultry supplier. 
Now, then, whats the last entry?
 December 22nd. Twenty-four geese at 7s.
6d. 
Quite so. There you are. And underneath?
 Sold to Mr. Windigate of the Alpha, at 12s.  What have you to say now?
Sherlock Holmes looked deeply chagrined. He drew a sovereign from his pocket and threw it down upon the slab, turning away  with the air of   a man whose disgust is too  deep  for  words.  A few yards off he stopped under a lamp-post and laughed in the hearty, noiseless fashion which was peculiar to him.
When you see a man with whiskers of that cut and the Pink un protruding out of his pocket, you can always draw him by a bet, said he. I daresay that if I had put 100 down in front of him, that man would not have given me such complete infor- mation as was drawn from him by the idea that he was doing me on a wager. Well, Watson, we are, I fancy, nearing the end of our quest, and the only point which remains to be determined is whether we should go on to this Mrs. Oakshott to-night, or whether we should reserve it for to-morrow. It is clear from what that surly fellow said that there are others besides ourselves who are anxious about the matter, and I should
His remarks were suddenly cut short by a loud hubbub which broke out from the stall which we had just left. Turning round we saw a little rat- faced fellow standing in the centre of the circle of yellow light which was thrown by the swinging lamp, while Breckinridge, the salesman, framed in the door of his stall, was shaking his fists fiercely  at the cringing figure.
Ive had enough of you and your geese, he shouted. I wish you were all at the devil together. If you come pestering me any more with your silly talk Ill set the dog at you. You bring Mrs. Oakshott here and Ill answer her, but what have you to do with it? Did I buy the geese off you?
No; but one of them was mine all the same, whined the little man.
Well, then, ask Mrs. Oakshott for it. She told me to ask you.
Well,  you  can ask the King of Proosia, for all  I care. Ive had enough of it. Get out of this! He rushed fiercely forward, and the inquirer flitted away into the darkness.
Ha! this may save us a visit to Brixton Road, whispered Holmes. Come with me, and we  will see what is to be made of this fellow. Striding through the scattered knots of people who lounged round the flaring stalls, my companion speedily overtook the little man and touched him upon the shoulder. He sprang round, and  I  could  see  in the gas-light that every vestige of colour had been driven from his face.
Who are you, then? What do you want? he asked in a quavering voice.
You will excuse me, said Holmes blandly,  but I could not help overhearing the questions which you put to the salesman just now. I think that I could be of assistance to you.
You? Who are you? How could you know anything of the matter?
My name is Sherlock Holmes. It is my business to know what other people dont know.
But you can know nothing of this?
Excuse me, I know everything of it. You are endeavouring to trace some geese which were sold by Mrs. Oakshott, of Brixton Road, to a salesman named Breckinridge, by him in turn to Mr. Windi- gate, of the Alpha, and by him to his club, of which Mr. Henry Baker is a member.
Oh, sir, you are the very man whom I have longed to meet, cried the little fellow with out- stretched hands and quivering fingers. I can hardly explain to you how interested I am in this matter.
Sherlock Holmes hailed a four-wheeler which was  passing.  In that case we  had better discuss  it in a cosy room rather than in this wind-swept market-place, said he. But pray tell me, before we go farther, who it is that I have the pleasure of assisting.
The man hesitated for an instant.  My name  is John Robinson, he answered with a sidelong glance.
No, no; the real name, said Holmes sweetly. It is always awkward doing business with an alias.
A flush sprang to the white cheeks of the stranger. Well then, said he, my real name is James Ryder.
Precisely so. Head attendant at the Hotel Cos- mopolitan. Pray step into the cab, and I shall soon be able to tell you everything which you  would wish to know.



The little man stood glancing from one to the other of us with half-frightened, half-hopeful eyes, as one who is not sure whether he is on the verge  of a windfall or of a catastrophe. Then he stepped into the cab, and in half an hour we were back in the sitting-room at Baker Street. Nothing had been said during our drive, but the high, thin breathing of our new companion, and the claspings and un- claspings of his hands, spoke of the nervous tension within him.
Here we are! said Holmes cheerily as we filed into the room. The fire looks very seasonable in this weather. You look cold, Mr. Ryder. Pray take the basket-chair. I will just put on my slippers be- fore we settle this little matter of yours. Now, then! You want to know what became of those geese?
Yes, sir.
Or rather, I fancy, of that goose. It was one bird, I imagine in which you were interestedwhite, with a black bar across the tail.
Ryder quivered with emotion. Oh, sir, he cried, can you tell me where it went to?
It came here. Here?
Yes, and a most remarkable bird it proved. I dont wonder that you  should take an interest in  it. It laid an egg after it was deadthe bonniest, brightest little blue egg that ever was  seen.  I have it here in my museum.
Our visitor staggered to his feet and clutched the mantelpiece with his right hand. Holmes un- locked his strong-box and held up the blue car- buncle, which shone out like a star, with a cold, brilliant, many-pointed radiance. Ryder stood glar- ing with a drawn face, uncertain whether to claim or to disown it.
The games up, Ryder, said Holmes quietly. Hold up, man, or youll be into the fire! Give him an arm back into his chair, Watson. Hes not got blood enough to go in for felony with impunity. Give him a dash of brandy. So!  Now he looks a  little more human. What a shrimp it is, to be sure!
For a moment he had staggered and nearly fallen, but the brandy brought a tinge of colour into his cheeks, and he sat staring with frightened eyes at his accuser.
I have almost every link in my hands, and all the proofs which I could possibly need, so there is little which you need tell me. Still, that little may as well be cleared up to make the case complete. You had heard, Ryder, of this blue stone of the Countess of Morcars?
It was Catherine Cusack who told me of it, said he in a crackling voice.
I seeher ladyships waiting-maid. Well, the temptation of sudden wealth so easily  acquired was too much for you, as it has been for better men before you; but you were not very scrupulous in  the means you used. It seems to me, Ryder, that there is the making of a very pretty villain in you. You knew that this man Horner, the plumber, had been concerned in some such matter before, and that suspicion would rest the more readily upon him. What did you do, then? You  made  some small job in my ladys roomyou and your con- federate Cusackand you managed that he should be the man sent for. Then, when he had left, you rifled the jewel-case, raised the alarm, and had this unfortunate man arrested. You then
Ryder threw himself down suddenly upon the rug and clutched at my companions knees. For Gods sake, have mercy! he shrieked. Think of my father! Of my mother! It would break their hearts. I never went wrong before! I never will again. I swear it. Ill swear it on a Bible. Oh, dont bring it into court! For Christs sake, dont!
Get back into your chair! said Holmes sternly. It is very well to cringe and crawl now, but you thought little enough of this poor Horner in the dock for a crime of which he knew nothing.
I will fly, Mr. Holmes. I will leave the country, sir. Then the charge against him will break down.
Hum! We will talk about that. And now let us hear a true account of the next act. How came the stone into the goose, and how came the goose into the open market? Tell us the truth, for there lies your only hope of safety.
Ryder passed his tongue over his parched lips. I will tell you it just  as  it  happened,  sir,  said  he. When Horner had been arrested, it seemed to me that it would be best for me to get away with  the stone at once, for I did not know at what mo- ment the police might not take it into their heads to search me and my room. There was no place about the hotel where it would be safe. I went out, as if on some commission, and I made for my sisters house. She had married a man named Oakshott, and lived in Brixton Road, where she fattened fowls for the market. All the way there every man I met seemed to me to be a policeman or a detective;  and,  for   all that it was a cold night, the sweat was pouring down my face before I came to the Brixton Road. My sister asked me what was  the matter, and why I was so pale; but I told her that I had been upset by the jewel robbery at the hotel. Then I went into



the back yard and smoked a pipe and wondered what it would be best to do.
I had a friend once called Maudsley, who went to the bad, and has just been serving his time in Pentonville. One day he had met me, and fell into talk about the ways of thieves, and how they could get rid of what they stole. I knew that he would be true to me, for I knew one or two things about him; so I made up my mind to go right on to Kilburn, where he lived, and take him into my confidence. He would show me how to turn the stone into money. But how to get to him in safety? I thought of the agonies I had gone through in coming from the hotel. I might at any moment be seized and searched, and there would be the stone in my waist- coat pocket. I was leaning against the wall at the time and looking at the geese which were waddling about round my feet, and suddenly an idea came into my head which showed me how I could beat the best detective that ever lived.
My sister had told me some weeks before that I might have the pick of her geese for a Christmas present, and I knew that she was always as good  as her word.  I would take my goose now, and in   it I would carry my stone to Kilburn. There was a little shed in the yard, and behind this I drove one of the birdsa fine big one, white, with a barred tail. I caught it, and prying its bill open, I thrust the stone down its throat as far as my finger could reach. The bird gave a gulp, and I felt the stone pass along its gullet and down into its crop. But the creature flapped and struggled, and out came my sister to know what was the matter. As I turned to speak to her the brute broke loose and fluttered off among the others.
 Whatever were you doing with that bird, Jem? says she.
 Well, said I, you said youd give me one for Christmas, and I was feeling which was the fattest.
 Oh, says she, weve set yours aside for youJems bird, we call it. Its the big white one over yonder. Theres twenty-six of them, which makes one for you, and one for us, and two dozen for the market.
 Thank you, Maggie, says I; but if it is all the same to you, Id rather have that one I was handling just now.
 The other is a good three pound heavier, said she, and we fattened it expressly for you.
 Never mind. Ill have the other, and Ill take  it now, said I.
 Oh, just as you like, said she, a little huffed. Which is it you want, then?
 That white one with the barred tail, right in the middle of the flock.
 Oh, very well. Kill it and take it with you. Well, I did what she said, Mr. Holmes, and I
carried the bird all the way to Kilburn.  I told my
pal what I had done, for he was a man that it was easy to tell a thing like that to. He laughed until he choked, and we got a knife and opened the goose. My heart turned to water, for there was no sign of the stone, and I knew that some terrible mistake had occurred. I left the bird, rushed back to my sisters, and hurried into the back yard. There was not a bird to be seen there.
 Where are they all, Maggie? I cried.  Gone to the dealers, Jem.
 Which dealers?
 Breckinridge, of Covent Garden.
 But was there another with a barred tail? I asked, the same as the one I chose?
 Yes, Jem; there were two barred-tailed ones, and I could never tell them apart.
Well, then, of course I saw it all, and I ran off as hard as my feet would carry me to this man Breckinridge; but he had sold the lot at once, and not one word would he tell me as to where they had gone. You heard him yourselves to-night. Well, he has always answered me like that. My sister thinks that I am going mad. Sometimes I think  that I am myself. And nowand now I am myself  a branded thief, without ever having touched the wealth for which I sold my character. God help me! God help me! He burst into convulsive sobbing, with his face buried in his hands.
There was a long silence, broken only by his heavy breathing and by the measured tapping of Sherlock Holmes finger-tips upon the edge of the table. Then my friend rose and threw open the door.
Get out! said he.
What, sir! Oh, Heaven bless you! No more words. Get out!
And no more words were needed. There was a rush, a clatter upon the stairs, the bang of a door, and the crisp rattle of running footfalls from the street.
After all, Watson, said Holmes, reaching up his hand for his clay pipe, I am not retained by the police to supply their deficiencies. If Horner were in danger it would be another thing; but this fellow will not appear against him, and the case must collapse. I suppose that I am commuting a felony, but it is just possible that I am saving a soul. This fellow will not go wrong again; he is



too terribly frightened. Send him to jail now, and you make him a jail-bird for life. Besides, it is the season of forgiveness.  Chance has put in our way  a most singular and whimsical problem, and its
solution is its own reward. If you will have the goodness to touch the bell, Doctor, we will begin another investigation, in which, also a bird will be the chief feature.



























The Adventure of the Speckled Band





O
n glancing over my notes of the seventy odd cases in which I have  during  the last eight years studied the methods of my friend Sherlock Holmes, I find many
tragic, some comic, a large number merely strange, but none commonplace; for, working as he did rather for the love of his art than for the acquire- ment of wealth, he refused to associate himself with any investigation which did not tend towards the unusual, and even the fantastic. Of all these varied cases, however, I cannot recall any which presented more singular features than that which was asso- ciated with the well-known Surrey family of the Roylotts of Stoke Moran. The events in question occurred in the early days of my association with Holmes, when we were sharing rooms as bachelors in Baker Street. It is possible that I might have placed them upon record before, but a promise of secrecy was made at the time, from which I have only been freed during the last month by the un- timely death of the lady to whom the pledge was given. It is perhaps as well that the facts should now come to light, for I have reasons to know that there are widespread rumours as to the death of Dr. Grimesby Roylott which tend to make the matter even more terrible than the truth.
It was early in April in the year 83 that I woke one morning to find Sherlock Holmes standing, fully dressed, by the side of my bed. He was a late riser, as a rule, and as the clock on the mantelpiece showed me that it was only a quarter-past seven, I blinked up at him in some surprise, and perhaps just a little resentment, for I was myself regular in my habits.
Very sorry to knock you up, Watson, said he, but its the common lot this morning. Mrs. Hud- son has been knocked up, she retorted upon me, and I on you.
What is it, thena fire?
No; a client. It seems that a young lady has arrived in a considerable state of excitement, who insists upon seeing me. She is waiting now in the sitting-room. Now, when young ladies wander about the metropolis at this hour of the morning, and knock sleepy people up out of their beds, I presume that it is something very pressing which they have to communicate. Should it prove to be  an interesting case, you would, I am sure, wish to follow it from the outset. I thought, at any rate, that I should call you and give you the chance.
My dear fellow, I would not miss it for any- thing.
I had no keener pleasure than in following Holmes in his professional investigations, and in
admiring the rapid deductions, as swift as intu- itions, and yet always founded on a logical basis with which he unravelled the problems which were submitted to him. I rapidly threw on my clothes and was ready in a few minutes to accompany my friend down to the sitting-room. A lady dressed in black and heavily veiled, who had been sitting in the window, rose as we entered.
Good-morning, madam, said Holmes cheerily. My name is Sherlock Holmes. This is my intimate friend and associate, Dr. Watson, before whom you can speak as freely as before myself. Ha! I am glad to see that Mrs. Hudson has had the good sense to light the fire. Pray draw up to it, and I shall order you a cup of hot coffee, for I observe that you are shivering.
It is not cold which makes me shiver, said  the woman in a low voice, changing her seat as requested.
What, then?
It is fear, Mr. Holmes. It is terror. She raised her veil as she spoke, and we could see that she  was indeed in a pitiable state of agitation, her face all drawn and grey, with restless frightened eyes, like those of some hunted animal. Her  features and figure were those of a woman of thirty, but her hair was shot with premature grey, and her expres- sion was weary and haggard. Sherlock Holmes ran her over with one of his quick, all-comprehensive glances.
You must not fear, said he soothingly, bend- ing forward and patting her forearm. We shall soon set matters right, I have no doubt. You have come in by train this morning, I see.
You know me, then?
No, but I observe the second half of a return ticket in the palm of your left glove. You must have started early, and yet you had a good drive in a dog-cart, along heavy roads, before you reached the station.
The lady gave a violent start and stared in be- wilderment at my companion.
There is no mystery, my dear madam, said  he, smiling. The left arm of your jacket is spat- tered with mud in no less than seven places. The marks are perfectly fresh. There is no vehicle save  a dog-cart which throws up mud in that way, and then only when you sit on the left-hand side of the driver.
Whatever your reasons may be, you are per- fectly correct, said she. I started from home be- fore six, reached Leatherhead at twenty past, and came in by the first train to Waterloo. Sir, I can



stand this strain no longer; I shall go mad if it con- tinues. I have no one to turn tonone, save only one, who cares for me,  and he,  poor fellow,  can  be of little aid. I have heard of you, Mr. Holmes; I have heard of you from Mrs. Farintosh, whom you helped in the hour of her sore need. It was from her that I had your address. Oh, sir, do you not think that you could help me, too, and at least throw a little light through the dense darkness which sur- rounds me? At present it is out of my power to reward you for your services, but in a month or six weeks I shall be married, with the control of my own income, and then at least you shall not find me ungrateful.
Holmes turned to his desk and, unlocking it, drew out a small case-book, which he consulted.
Farintosh, said he. Ah yes, I recall the case; it was concerned with an opal tiara. I think it was before your time, Watson. I can only say, madam, that I shall be happy to devote the same care to your case as I did to that of your friend. As to reward, my profession is its own reward; but you are at liberty to defray whatever expenses I may be put to, at the time which suits you best. And now I beg that you will lay before us everything that may help us in forming an opinion upon the matter.
Alas! replied our visitor, the very horror of my situation lies in the fact that my fears are so vague, and my suspicions depend so entirely upon small points, which might seem trivial to another, that even he to whom of all others I have a right to look for help and advice looks upon all that I tell him about it as the fancies of a nervous woman. He does not say so, but I can read it from his soothing answers and averted eyes. But I have heard, Mr. Holmes, that you can see deeply into the manifold wickedness of the human heart. You may advise me how to walk amid the dangers which encompass me.
I am all attention, madam.
My name is Helen Stoner, and I am living with my stepfather, who is the last survivor of one of the oldest Saxon families in England, the Roylotts of Stoke Moran, on the western border of Surrey.
Holmes nodded his head. The name is familiar to me, said he.
The family was at one time among the richest in England, and the estates extended over the bor- ders into Berkshire in the north, and Hampshire in the west. In the last century, however, four succes- sive heirs were of a dissolute and wasteful disposi- tion, and the family ruin was eventually completed by a gambler in the days of the Regency. Nothing
was left save a few acres of ground, and the two- hundred-year-old house, which is itself crushed under a heavy mortgage. The last squire dragged out his existence there, living the horrible life of an aristocratic pauper; but his only son, my stepfather, seeing that he must adapt himself to the new con- ditions, obtained an advance from a relative, which enabled him to take a medical degree and went out to Calcutta, where, by his professional skill and his force of character, he established a large practice. In a fit of anger, however, caused by some robberies which had been perpetrated in the house, he beat his native butler to death and narrowly escaped     a capital sentence. As it was, he suffered a long term of imprisonment and afterwards returned to England a morose and disappointed man.
When Dr. Roylott was in India he married my mother, Mrs. Stoner, the young widow of Major- General Stoner, of the Bengal Artillery. My sister Julia and I were twins, and we were only two years old at the time of my mothers re-marriage. She had a considerable sum of moneynot less than 1000 a yearand this she bequeathed to Dr. Roylott en- tirely while we resided with him, with a provision that a certain annual sum should be allowed to each of us in the event of our marriage. Shortly after  our return to England my mother diedshe was killed eight years ago in a railway accident near Crewe. Dr. Roylott then abandoned his attempts to establish himself in practice in London and took us to live with him in the old ancestral house at Stoke Moran. The money which my mother had left was enough for all our wants, and there seemed to be no obstacle to our happiness.
But a terrible change came over our stepfather about this time. Instead of making friends and ex- changing visits with our neighbours, who had at first been overjoyed to see a Roylott of Stoke Moran back in the old family seat, he shut himself up in his house and seldom came out save to indulge in ferocious quarrels with whoever might cross his path. Violence of temper approaching to mania has been hereditary in the men of the family, and in my stepfathers case it had, I believe, been intensified by his long residence in the tropics. A series of disgraceful brawls took place, two of which ended in the police-court, until at last he became the ter- ror of the village, and the folks would fly at his approach, for he is a man of immense strength, and absolutely uncontrollable in his anger.
Last week he hurled the local blacksmith over a parapet into a stream, and it was only by paying over all the money which I could gather together that I was able to avert another public exposure. He had no friends at all save the wandering gypsies,



and he would give these vagabonds leave to en- camp upon the few acres of bramble-covered land which represent the family estate, and would accept in return the hospitality of their tents, wandering away with them sometimes for weeks on end. He has a passion also for Indian animals, which are sent over to him by a correspondent, and he has at this moment a cheetah and a baboon, which wan- der freely over his grounds and are feared by the villagers almost as much as their master.
You can imagine from what I say that my poor sister Julia and I had no great pleasure in our lives. No servant would stay with us, and for a long time we did all the work of the house. She  was  but thirty at the time of her death, and yet her hair had already begun to whiten, even as mine has.
Your sister is dead, then?
She died just two years ago, and it is of her death that I wish to speak to you. You can under- stand that, living the life which I have described, we were little likely to see anyone of our own age and position. We had, however, an aunt, my mothers maiden sister, Miss Honoria Westphail, who lives near Harrow,  and  we  were  occasionally  allowed to pay short visits at this ladys house. Julia went there at Christmas two  years ago,  and met there   a half-pay major of marines, to whom she became engaged. My stepfather learned of the engagement when my sister returned and offered no objection to the marriage; but within a fortnight of the day which had been fixed for the wedding, the terrible event occurred which has deprived me of my only companion.
Sherlock Holmes had been leaning back in his chair with his eyes  closed and his head sunk in      a cushion, but he half opened his lids now and glanced across at his visitor.
Pray be precise as to details, said he.
It is easy for me to be so, for every event of that dreadful time is seared into my memory. The manor-house is, as I have already said, very old, and only one wing is now inhabited. The bedrooms in this wing are on the ground floor, the sitting- rooms being in the central block of the buildings. Of these bedrooms the first is Dr. Roylotts, the second my sisters, and the third my own.  There   is no communication between them, but they all open out into the same corridor. Do I make myself plain?
Perfectly so.
The windows of the three rooms open out upon the lawn. That fatal night Dr. Roylott had gone to his room early,  though we knew that he
had not retired to rest, for my sister was troubled by the smell of the strong Indian cigars which it was his custom to smoke. She left her room, there- fore, and came into mine, where she sat for some time, chatting about her approaching wedding. At eleven oclock she rose to leave me, but she paused at the door and looked back.
 Tell me, Helen, said she, have you ever heard anyone whistle in the dead of the night?
 Never, said I.
 I suppose that you could not possibly whistle, yourself, in your sleep?
 Certainly not. But why?
 Because during the last few nights I have al- ways, about three in the morning, heard a low, clear whistle. I am a light sleeper, and it has awakened me. I cannot tell where it came fromperhaps from the next room, perhaps from the lawn. I thought that I would just ask you whether you had heard  it.
 No, I have not. It must be those wretched gipsies in the plantation.
 Very likely. And yet if it were on the lawn, I wonder that you did not hear it also.
 Ah, but I sleep more heavily than you.
 Well, it is of no great consequence, at any rate. She smiled back at me, closed my door, and a few moments later I heard her key turn in the lock.
Indeed, said Holmes. Was it your custom always to lock yourselves in at night?
Always.
And why?
I think that I mentioned to you that the doctor kept a cheetah and a baboon. We had no feeling of security unless our doors were locked.
Quite so. Pray proceed with your statement. I could not sleep that night.  A vague feeling
of  impending  misfortune  impressed  me.   My sis-
ter and I, you will recollect, were twins, and you know how subtle are the links which bind two souls which are so closely allied. It was a wild night. The wind was howling outside, and the rain was beat- ing and splashing against the windows. Suddenly, amid all the hubbub of the gale, there burst forth the wild scream of a terrified woman. I knew that  it was my sisters voice. I sprang from my bed, wrapped a shawl round me, and rushed into the corridor.  As I opened my door I seemed to hear     a low whistle, such as my sister described, and a few moments later a clanging sound, as if a mass  of metal had fallen. As I ran down the passage, my sisters door was unlocked, and revolved slowly upon its hinges. I stared at it horror-stricken, not



knowing what was about to issue from it. By the light of the corridor-lamp I saw my sister appear  at the opening, her face blanched with terror, her hands groping for help, her whole figure swaying  to and fro like that of a drunkard.   I ran to her   and threw my arms round her, but at that moment her knees seemed to give way and she fell to the ground. She writhed as one who is in terrible pain, and her limbs were  dreadfully convulsed.  At first  I thought that she had not recognised me, but as I bent over her she suddenly shrieked out in a voice which I shall never  forget,  Oh,  my God!  Helen!  It was the band! The speckled band! There was something else which she would fain have  said, and she stabbed with her finger into the air in the direction of the doctors room, but a fresh convul- sion seized her and choked her words. I rushed out, calling loudly for my stepfather, and I  met him hastening from his room in his dressing-gown. When he reached my sisters side she was uncon- scious, and though he poured brandy down her throat and sent for medical aid from the village, all efforts were in vain, for she slowly sank and died without having recovered her consciousness. Such was the dreadful end of my beloved sister.
One moment, said Holmes, are you sure about this whistle and metallic sound? Could you swear to it?
That was what the county coroner asked me at the inquiry. It is my strong impression that I heard it, and yet, among the crash of the gale and the creaking of an old house, I may possibly have been deceived.
Was your sister dressed?
No, she was in her night-dress. In her right hand was found the charred stump of a match, and in her left a match-box.
Showing that she had struck a light and looked about her when the alarm took place. That is impor- tant. And what conclusions did the coroner come to?
He investigated the case with great care, for Dr. Roylotts conduct had long been notorious in the county, but he was unable to find any satisfactory cause of death. My evidence showed that the door had been fastened upon the inner side, and the win- dows were blocked by old-fashioned shutters with broad iron bars, which were secured every night. The walls were carefully sounded, and were shown to be quite solid all round, and the flooring was also thoroughly examined, with the same result. The chimney is wide, but is barred up by four large staples. It is certain, therefore, that my sister was
quite alone when she met her end. Besides, there were no marks of any violence upon her.
How about poison?
The doctors examined her for it, but without success.
What do you think that this unfortunate lady died of, then?
It is my belief that she died of pure fear and nervous shock, though what it was that frightened her I cannot imagine.
Were there gipsies in the plantation at the time?
Yes, there are nearly  always  some  there. Ah, and what did you gather from this allusion
to a banda speckled band?
Sometimes I have thought that it was merely the wild talk of delirium, sometimes that it may have referred to some band of people, perhaps to these very gipsies in the plantation. I do not know whether the spotted handkerchiefs which so many of them wear over their heads might have suggested the strange adjective which she used.
Holmes shook his head like a man who is far from being satisfied.
These are very deep waters, said he; pray go on with your narrative.
Two years have passed since then, and my life has been until lately lonelier than ever. A month ago, however, a dear friend, whom I have known  for many years, has done me the honour to ask my hand in marriage. His name is ArmitagePercy Ar- mitagethe second son of Mr. Armitage, of Crane Water, near Reading. My stepfather has offered no opposition to the match, and we are to be married in the course of the spring. Two days ago some re- pairs were started in the west wing of the building, and my bedroom wall has been pierced, so that I have had to move into the chamber in which my sister died, and to sleep in the very bed in which she slept. Imagine, then, my thrill of terror when last night, as I lay awake, thinking over her ter- rible fate, I suddenly heard in the silence of the night the low whistle which had been the herald   of her own death.  I sprang up and lit the lamp,  but nothing was to be seen in the room. I was too shaken to go to bed again, however, so I dressed, and as soon as it was  daylight I slipped down, got  a dog-cart at the Crown Inn, which is opposite, and drove to Leatherhead, from whence I have come on this morning with the one object of seeing you and asking your advice.
You have done wisely, said my friend. But have you told me all?
Yes, all.



Miss Roylott, you have not. You are screening your stepfather.
Why, what do you mean?
For answer Holmes pushed back the frill of black lace which fringed the hand that lay upon our visitors knee. Five little livid spots, the marks of four fingers and a thumb, were printed upon the white wrist.
You have been cruelly used, said Holmes.
The lady coloured deeply and covered over her injured wrist. He is a hard man, she said, and perhaps he hardly knows his own strength.
There was a long silence, during which Holmes leaned his chin upon his hands and stared into the crackling fire.
This is a very deep business, he said at last. There are a thousand details which I should de- sire to know before I decide upon our course of action. Yet we have not a moment to lose. If  we were to come to Stoke Moran to-day, would it be possible for us to see over these rooms without the knowledge of your stepfather?
As it happens, he spoke of coming into town to-day upon some most important business. It is probable that he will be away all day, and that there would be nothing to disturb you. We have a house- keeper now, but she is old and foolish, and I could easily get her out of the way.
Excellent. You are not averse to this trip, Wat- son?
By no means.
Then we shall both come. What are you going to do yourself?
I have one or two things which I would wish  to do now that I am in town. But I shall return by the twelve oclock train, so as to be there in time for your coming.
And you may  expect us early in the afternoon. I have myself some small business matters to attend to. Will you not wait and breakfast?
No, I must go. My heart is lightened already since I have confided my trouble to you. I shall look forward to seeing you again this afternoon. She dropped her thick black veil over her face and glided from the room.
And what do you think of it all, Watson? asked Sherlock Holmes, leaning back in his chair.
It seems to me to be a most dark and sinister business.
Dark enough and sinister enough.
Yet if the lady is correct in saying that the floor- ing and walls are sound, and that the door, window, and chimney are impassable, then her sister must have been undoubtedly alone when she met her mysterious end.
What becomes, then, of these nocturnal whis- tles, and what of the very peculiar words of the dying woman?
I cannot think.
When you combine the ideas of whistles at night, the presence of a band of gipsies who are on intimate terms with this old doctor, the fact that we have every reason to believe that the doctor has an interest in preventing his stepdaughters mar- riage, the dying allusion to a band, and, finally, the fact that Miss Helen Stoner heard a metallic clang, which might have been caused by one of those metal bars that secured the shutters falling back into its place, I think that there is good ground to think that the mystery may be cleared along those lines.
But what, then, did the gipsies do? I cannot imagine.
I see many objections to any such theory.
And so do I. It is precisely for that reason that we are going to Stoke Moran this day.  I want to  see whether the objections are fatal, or if they may be explained away. But what in the name of the devil!
The ejaculation had been drawn from my com- panion by the fact that our door had been suddenly dashed open, and that a huge man had framed himself in the aperture. His costume was a peculiar mixture of the professional and of the agricultural, having a black top-hat, a long frock-coat, and a pair of high gaiters, with a hunting-crop  swing- ing in his hand. So tall was he that his hat ac-  tually brushed the cross bar of the doorway,  and his breadth seemed to span it across from side to side. A large face, seared with a thousand wrinkles, burned yellow with the sun, and marked with ev- ery evil passion, was turned from one to the other of us, while his deep-set, bile-shot eyes, and his high, thin, fleshless nose, gave him somewhat the resemblance to a fierce old bird of prey.
Which of you is Holmes? asked this appari- tion.
My name, sir; but you have the advantage of me, said my companion quietly.
I am Dr. Grimesby Roylott, of Stoke Moran. Indeed, Doctor, said Holmes blandly. Pray
take a seat.



I will do nothing of the kind. My stepdaughter has been here. I have traced her. What has she been saying to you?
It is a little cold for the time of the year, said Holmes.
What has she been saying to you? screamed the old man furiously.
But I have heard that the crocuses promise well, continued my companion imperturbably.
Ha! You put me off, do you? said our new vis- itor, taking a step forward and shaking his hunting- crop. I know you, you scoundrel! I have heard of you before. You are Holmes, the meddler.
My friend smiled. Holmes, the busybody! His smile broadened.
Holmes, the Scotland Yard Jack-in-office!
Holmes chuckled heartily. Your conversation is most entertaining, said he. When you go out close the door, for there is a decided draught.
I will go when I have said my say. Dont you dare to meddle with my affairs. I know that Miss Stoner has been here. I traced her! I am a dan- gerous man to fall foul of! See here. He stepped swiftly forward, seized the poker,  and bent it into  a curve with his huge brown hands.
See that you keep yourself  out  of  my  grip, he snarled, and hurling the twisted poker into the fireplace he strode out of the room.
He seems a very amiable person, said Holmes, laughing. I am not quite so bulky, but if he had re- mained I might have shown him that my grip was not much more feeble than his own. As he spoke he picked up the steel poker and, with a sudden effort, straightened it out again.
Fancy his having the insolence to confound me with the official detective force! This incident gives zest to our investigation, however, and I only trust that our little friend will not suffer from her impru- dence in allowing this brute to trace her. And now, Watson,  we  shall order breakfast,  and afterwards I shall walk down to Doctors Commons, where I hope to get some data which may help us in this matter.
It was nearly one oclock when Sherlock Holmes returned from his excursion. He held in his hand a sheet of blue paper, scrawled over with notes and figures.
I have seen the will of the deceased wife, said he. To determine its exact meaning I have been
obliged to work out the present prices of the in- vestments with which it is concerned. The total income, which at the time of the wifes death was little short of 1100, is now, through the fall in agri- cultural prices, not more than 750. Each daughter can claim an income of 250, in case of marriage. It is evident, therefore, that if both girls had mar- ried, this beauty would have had a mere pittance, while even one of them would cripple him to  a very serious extent. My mornings work has not been wasted, since it has proved that he has the very strongest motives for standing in the way of anything of the sort. And now, Watson, this is too serious for dawdling, especially as the old man is aware that we are interesting ourselves in his af- fairs; so if you are ready, we shall call a cab and drive to Waterloo.  I should be very much obliged  if you would slip your revolver into your pocket.  An Eleys No. 2 is an excellent argument with gen- tlemen who can twist steel pokers into knots. That and a tooth-brush are, I think, all that we need.
At Waterloo we were fortunate in catching a train for Leatherhead, where we hired a trap at the station inn and drove for four or five miles through the lovely Surrey lanes. It was a perfect day, with a bright sun and a few fleecy clouds in the heavens. The trees and wayside hedges were just throwing out their first green shoots,  and the air was  full   of the pleasant smell of the moist earth.   To  me    at least there was a strange contrast between the sweet promise of the spring and this sinister quest upon which we were engaged.  My companion sat in the front of the trap, his arms folded, his hat pulled down over his eyes, and his chin sunk upon his breast, buried in the deepest thought. Suddenly, however, he started, tapped me on the shoulder, and pointed over the meadows.
Look there! said he.
A heavily timbered park stretched up in a gentle slope, thickening into a grove at the highest point. From amid the branches there jutted out the grey gables and high roof-tree of a very old mansion.
Stoke Moran? said he.
Yes, sir, that be the house of Dr. Grimesby Roy- lott, remarked the driver.
There is some building going on there, said Holmes; that is where we are going.
Theres the village, said the driver, pointing  to a cluster of roofs some distance to the left; but if you want to get to the house, youll find it shorter to get over this stile, and so by the foot-path over the fields. There it is, where the lady is walking.



And the lady, I fancy, is Miss Stoner, observed Holmes, shading his eyes. Yes, I think we had better do as you suggest.
We got off, paid our fare, and the trap rattled back on its way to Leatherhead.
I thought it as well, said Holmes as we climbed the stile, that this  fellow  should  think we had come here as architects, or on some definite business. It may stop his gossip. Good-afternoon, Miss Stoner. You see that we have been as good as our word.
Our client of the morning had hurried forward to meet us with a face which spoke her joy. I have been waiting so eagerly for you, she cried, shak- ing hands with us warmly. All has turned out splendidly. Dr. Roylott has gone to town, and it is unlikely that he will be back before evening.
We have had the pleasure of making the doc- tors acquaintance, said Holmes, and in a few words he sketched out what had occurred. Miss Stoner turned white to the lips as she listened.
Good heavens! she cried, he has followed me, then.
So it appears.
He is so cunning that I never know when I am safe from him. What will he say when he returns?
He must guard himself, for he may find that there is someone more cunning than himself upon his track. You must lock yourself up from him to- night. If he is violent, we shall take you away to your aunts at Harrow. Now, we must make  the best use of our time, so kindly take us at once to the rooms which we are to examine.
The building was of grey, lichen-blotched stone, with a high central portion and two curving wings, like the claws of a crab, thrown out on each side.  In one of these wings the windows were broken and blocked with wooden boards, while the roof was partly caved in, a picture of ruin. The central portion was in little better repair, but the right-hand block was comparatively modern, and the blinds  in the windows, with the blue smoke curling up from the chimneys, showed that this was  where the family resided. Some scaffolding had been erected against the end wall, and the stone-work had been broken into, but there were no signs of any workmen at the moment of our visit. Holmes walked slowly up and down the ill-trimmed lawn and examined with deep attention the outsides of the windows.
This, I take it, belongs to the room in which you used to sleep, the centre one to your sisters,
and the one next to the main building to Dr. Roy- lotts chamber?
Exactly so. But I am now sleeping in the mid- dle one.
Pending the alterations, as I understand. By the way, there does not seem to be any very press- ing need for repairs at that end wall.
There were none. I believe that it was an ex- cuse to move me from my room.
Ah! that is suggestive. Now, on the other side of this narrow wing runs the corridor from which these three rooms open. There are windows in it, of course?
Yes, but very small ones. Too narrow for any- one to pass through.
As you both locked your doors at night, your rooms were unapproachable from that side. Now, would you have the kindness to go into your room and bar your shutters?
Miss Stoner did so, and Holmes, after a careful examination through the open window, endeav- oured in every way to force the shutter open, but without success. There was no slit through which a knife could be passed to raise the bar. Then with his lens he tested the hinges, but they were of solid iron, built firmly into the massive masonry. Hum! said he, scratching his chin in some perplexity, my theory certainly presents some difficulties. No one could pass these shutters if they were bolted. Well, we shall see if the inside throws any light upon the matter.
A small side door led into the whitewashed corridor from which the three bedrooms opened. Holmes refused to examine the third chamber, so we passed at once to the second, that in which Miss Stoner was now sleeping, and in which her sister had met with her fate. It was a homely little room, with a low ceiling and a  gaping  fireplace,  after  the fashion of old country-houses. A brown chest of drawers stood in one corner, a narrow white- counterpaned bed in another, and a dressing-table on the left-hand side of the window. These articles, with two small wicker-work chairs, made up all the furniture in the room save for a square of Wilton carpet in the centre. The boards round and the panelling of the walls were of brown, worm-eaten oak, so old and discoloured that it may have dated from the original building of the house. Holmes drew one of the chairs into a corner and sat silent, while his eyes travelled round and round and up and down, taking in every detail of the apartment.
Where does that bell communicate with? he asked at last pointing to a thick bell-rope which



hung down beside the bed, the tassel actually lying upon the pillow.
It goes to the housekeepers room.  It looks newer than the other things?
Yes, it was only put there a couple of years ago.
Your sister asked for it, I suppose?
No, I never heard of her using it. We used always to get what we wanted for ourselves.
Indeed, it seemed unnecessary to put so nice  a bell-pull there. You will excuse me for a few minutes while I satisfy myself as to this floor. He threw himself down upon his face with his lens     in his hand and crawled swiftly backward and for- ward, examining minutely the cracks between the boards. Then he did the same with the wood-work with which the chamber was panelled. Finally he walked over to the bed and spent some time in staring at it and in running his eye up and down the wall. Finally he took the bell-rope in his hand and gave it a brisk tug.
Why, its a dummy, said he. Wont it ring?
No, it is not even attached to a wire. This is very interesting. You can see now that it is fastened to a hook just above where the little opening for the ventilator is.
How very absurd! I never noticed that before.
Very strange! muttered Holmes, pulling at the rope. There are one or two very singular points about this room. For example, what a fool a builder must be to open a ventilator into another room, when, with the same trouble, he might have com- municated with the outside air!
That is also quite modern, said the lady. Done about the same time as the bell-rope?
remarked Holmes.
Yes, there were several little changes carried out about that time.
They seem to have been of a  most  interest- ing characterdummy bell-ropes, and ventilators which do not ventilate. With your permission, Miss Stoner, we shall now carry our researches into the inner apartment.
Dr. Grimesby Roylotts chamber was larger than that of his step-daughter, but was as plainly fur- nished. A camp-bed, a small wooden shelf full of books, mostly of a technical character, an armchair beside the bed, a plain wooden chair against the wall, a round table, and a large iron safe were the principal things which met the eye. Holmes walked
slowly round and examined each and all of them with the keenest interest.
Whats in here? he asked, tapping the safe. My stepfathers business papers.
Oh! you have seen inside, then?
Only once, some years ago. I remember that it was full of papers.
There isnt a cat in it, for example? No. What a strange idea!
Well, look at this! He took up a small saucer of milk which stood on the top of it.
No; we dont keep a cat. But there is a cheetah and a baboon.
Ah, yes, of course! Well, a cheetah is just a big cat, and yet  a saucer of milk does not go very far  in satisfying its wants, I daresay. There is one point which I should wish to determine. He squatted down in front of the wooden chair and examined the seat of it with the greatest attention.
Thank you. That is quite settled, said he, ris- ing and putting his lens in his pocket. Hullo! Here is something interesting!
The object which had caught his eye was a small dog lash hung on one corner of the bed. The lash, however, was curled upon itself and tied so as to make a loop of whipcord.
What do you make of that, Watson?
Its a common enough lash. But I dont know why it should be tied.
That is not quite so common, is it? Ah, me! its a wicked world, and when a clever man turns his brains to crime it is the worst of all. I think that I have seen enough now, Miss Stoner, and with your permission we shall walk out upon the lawn.
I had never seen my friends face so grim or his brow so dark as it was when we turned from the scene of this investigation. We had walked several times up and down the lawn, neither Miss Stoner nor myself liking to break in upon his thoughts before he roused himself from his reverie.
It is very essential, Miss Stoner, said he, that you should absolutely follow my advice in every respect.
I shall most certainly do so.
The matter is too serious for any hesitation.
Your life may depend upon your compliance. I assure you that I am in your hands.
In the first place, both my friend and I must spend the night in your room.
Both Miss Stoner and I gazed at him in aston- ishment.



Yes, it must be so. Let me explain. I believe that that is the village inn over there?
Yes, that is the Crown.
Very good. Your windows would be visible from there?
Certainly.
You must confine yourself to your room, on pretence of a headache, when your stepfather comes back. Then when you hear him retire for the night, you must open the shutters of your window, undo the hasp, put your  lamp  there  as  a  signal to us, and then withdraw quietly with everything which you are likely to want into the room which you used to occupy. I have no doubt that, in spite of the repairs, you could manage there for one night.
Oh, yes, easily.
The rest you will leave in our hands. But what will you do?
We shall spend the night in your room, and we shall investigate the cause of this noise which has disturbed you.
I believe, Mr. Holmes, that you have already made up your mind, said Miss Stoner, laying her hand upon my companions sleeve.
Perhaps I have.
Then, for pitys sake, tell me what was the cause of my sisters death.
I should prefer to have clearer proofs before I speak.
You can at least tell me whether my own thought is correct, and if she died from some sud- den fright.
No, I do not think so. I think that there was probably some more tangible cause. And now, Miss Stoner, we must leave you for if Dr. Roylott returned and saw us our journey would be in vain. Good- bye, and be brave, for if you will do what I have  told you, you may rest assured that we shall soon drive away the dangers that threaten you.
Sherlock Holmes and I had no difficulty in en- gaging a bedroom and sitting-room at the Crown Inn. They were on the upper floor, and from our window we could command a view of the avenue gate, and of the inhabited wing of Stoke Moran Manor House. At dusk we saw Dr. Grimesby Roy- lott drive past, his huge form looming up beside the little figure of the lad who drove him. The boy had some slight difficulty in undoing the heavy iron gates, and we heard the hoarse roar of the doc- tors voice and saw the fury with which he shook his clinched fists at him. The trap drove on, and a
few minutes later we saw a sudden light spring up among the trees as the lamp was lit in one of the sitting-rooms.
Do you know, Watson, said Holmes as we sat together in the gathering darkness, I have really some scruples as to taking you to-night. There is a distinct element of danger.
Can I be of assistance?
Your presence might be invaluable. Then I shall certainly come.
It is very kind of you.
You speak of danger. You have evidently seen more in these rooms than was visible to me.
No, but I fancy that I may have deduced a little more. I imagine that you saw all that I did.
I saw nothing remarkable save the bell-rope, and what purpose that could answer I confess is more than I can imagine.
You saw the ventilator, too?
Yes, but I do not think that it is such a very unusual thing to have a small opening between two rooms. It was so small that a rat could hardly pass through.
I knew that we should find a ventilator before ever we came to Stoke Moran.
My  dear Holmes!
Oh, yes, I did. You remember in her statement she said that her sister could smell Dr. Roylotts cigar. Now, of course that suggested at once that there must be a communication between the two rooms. It could only be a small one, or it would have been remarked upon at the coroners inquiry. I deduced a ventilator.
But what harm can there be in that?
Well, there is at least a curious coincidence of dates.  A ventilator is made,  a cord is hung,  and   a lady who sleeps in the bed dies. Does not that strike you?
I cannot as yet see any connection.
Did you observe anything very peculiar about that bed?
No.
It was clamped to the floor. Did you ever see a bed fastened like that before?
I cannot say that I have.
The lady could not move her bed. It must always be in the same relative position to the venti- lator and to the ropeor so we may call it, since it was clearly never meant for a bell-pull.
Holmes, I cried, I seem to see dimly what you are hinting at. We are only just in time to prevent some subtle and horrible crime.



Subtle enough and horrible enough. When a doctor does go wrong he is the first of criminals. He has nerve and he has knowledge. Palmer and Pritchard were among the heads of their profession. This man strikes even deeper, but I think, Watson, that we shall be able to strike deeper still. But we shall have horrors enough before the night is over; for goodness sake let us have a quiet  pipe  and turn our minds for a few hours to something more cheerful.
About nine oclock the light among the trees was extinguished, and all was dark in the direction of the Manor House. Two hours passed slowly away, and then, suddenly, just at the stroke of eleven, a single bright light shone out right in front of us.
That is our signal, said Holmes, springing to his feet; it comes from the middle window.
As we passed out he exchanged a few words with the landlord, explaining that we were going on a late visit to an acquaintance, and that it was possible that we might spend the night there. A moment later we were out on the dark road, a chill wind blowing in our faces, and one yellow light twinkling in front of us through the gloom to guide us on our sombre errand.
There was little difficulty in entering the grounds, for unrepaired breaches gaped in the old park wall. Making our way among the trees, we reached the lawn, crossed it, and were about to enter through the window when out from a clump of laurel bushes there darted what seemed to be a hideous and distorted child, who threw itself upon the grass with writhing limbs and then ran swiftly across the lawn into the darkness.
My God! I whispered; did you see it?
Holmes was for the moment as startled as I. His hand closed like a vice upon my wrist in his agita- tion. Then he broke into a low laugh and put his lips to my ear.
It is a nice household, he murmured. That  is the baboon.
I had forgotten the strange pets which the doc- tor affected. There was a cheetah, too; perhaps we might find it upon our shoulders at any moment.   I confess that I felt easier in my mind when, after following Holmes example and slipping off my shoes, I found myself inside the bedroom. My com- panion noiselessly closed the shutters, moved the lamp onto the table, and cast his eyes round the room. All was as we had seen it in the daytime. Then creeping up to me and making a trumpet of his hand, he whispered into my ear again so gently
that it was all that I could do to distinguish the words:
The least sound would be fatal to our plans.  I nodded to show that I had heard.
We must sit without light. He would see it through the ventilator.
I nodded again.
Do not go asleep; your very life may depend upon it. Have your pistol ready in case we should need it. I will sit on the side of the bed, and you in that chair.
I took out my revolver and laid it on the corner of the table.
Holmes had brought up a long thin cane, and this he placed upon the bed beside him. By it he laid the box of matches and the stump of a candle. Then he turned down the lamp, and we were  left  in darkness.
How shall I ever forget that dreadful vigil? I could not hear a sound,  not even  the drawing of   a breath, and yet I knew that my companion sat open-eyed, within a few feet of me, in the same state of nervous tension in which I was myself. The shutters cut off the least ray of light, and we waited in absolute darkness.
From outside came the occasional cry of a night- bird, and once at our very window a long drawn catlike whine, which told us that the cheetah was indeed at liberty. Far away we could hear the deep tones of the parish clock, which boomed out every quarter of an hour. How long they seemed, those quarters! Twelve struck, and one and two and three, and still we sat waiting silently for whatever might befall.
Suddenly there was the momentary gleam of a light up in the direction of the ventilator, which van- ished immediately, but was succeeded by a strong smell of burning oil and heated metal.  Someone  in the next room had lit a dark-lantern. I heard a gentle sound of movement, and then all was silent once more, though the smell grew stronger. For half an hour I sat with straining ears. Then sud- denly another sound became audiblea very gen- tle, soothing sound, like that of a small jet of steam escaping continually from a kettle. The instant that we heard it,  Holmes sprang from the bed,  struck  a match, and lashed furiously with his cane at the bell-pull.
You see it, Watson? he yelled. You see it? But   I saw  nothing.	At   the   moment  when
Holmes struck the light I heard a low, clear whistle,
but the sudden glare flashing into my weary eyes made it impossible for me to tell what it was at



which my friend lashed so savagely. I could, how- ever, see that his face was deadly pale and filled with horror and loathing. He had ceased to strike and was gazing up at the ventilator when suddenly there broke from the silence of the night the most horrible cry to which I have ever listened. It swelled up louder and louder, a hoarse yell of pain and fear and anger all mingled in the one dreadful shriek. They say that away down in the village, and even in the distant parsonage, that cry raised the sleepers from their beds.  It struck cold to our hearts,  and   I stood gazing at Holmes, and he at me, until the last echoes of it had died away into the silence from which it rose.
What can it mean? I gasped.
It means that it is all over, Holmes answered. And perhaps, after all, it is for the best. Take your pistol, and we will enter Dr. Roylotts room.
With a grave face he lit the lamp and led the way down the corridor. Twice he struck at the cham- ber door without any reply from within. Then he turned the handle and entered, I at his heels, with the cocked pistol in my hand.
It was a singular sight which met our eyes. On the table stood a dark-lantern with the shutter half open, throwing a brilliant beam of light upon the iron safe, the door of which was ajar. Beside this table, on the wooden chair, sat Dr. Grimesby Roy- lott clad in a long grey dressing-gown, his bare ankles protruding beneath, and his feet thrust into red heelless Turkish slippers. Across his lap lay the short stock with the long lash which we had no- ticed during the day. His chin was cocked upward and his eyes were fixed in a dreadful, rigid stare at the corner of the ceiling.  Round his brow he had   a peculiar yellow band, with brownish speckles, which seemed to be bound tightly round his head. As we entered he made neither sound nor motion.
The band! the speckled band! whispered Holmes.
I took a step forward. In an instant his strange headgear began to move, and there reared itself from among his hair the squat diamond-shaped head and puffed neck of a loathsome serpent.
It is a swamp adder! cried Holmes; the dead- liest snake in India. He has died within ten seconds of being bitten. Violence does, in truth, recoil upon the violent, and the schemer falls into the pit which he digs for another. Let us thrust this creature back into its den, and we can then remove Miss Stoner to some place of shelter and let the county police know what has happened.
As he spoke he drew the dog-whip swiftly from the dead mans lap, and throwing the noose round the reptiles neck he drew it from its horrid perch and, carrying it at arms length, threw it into the iron safe, which he closed upon it.
Such are the true facts of the death of Dr. Grimesby Roylott, of Stoke Moran. It is not neces- sary that I should prolong a narrative which has already run to too great a length by telling how we broke the sad news to the terrified girl, how we conveyed her by the morning train to the care of her good aunt at Harrow, of how the slow process of official inquiry came to the conclusion that the doctor met his fate while indiscreetly playing with a dangerous pet. The little which I had yet to learn of the case was told me by Sherlock Holmes as we travelled back next day.
I had, said he, come to an entirely erroneous conclusion which shows, my dear Watson, how dangerous it always is to reason from insufficient data. The presence of the gipsies, and the use of the word band, which was used by the poor girl, no doubt, to explain the appearance  which  she had caught a hurried glimpse of by  the  light  of her match, were sufficient to put me upon an en- tirely wrong scent.  I can only claim the merit that  I instantly reconsidered my position when, how- ever, it became clear to me that whatever danger threatened an occupant of the room could not come either from the window or the door. My attention was speedily drawn, as I have already remarked to you, to this ventilator, and to the bell-rope which hung down to the bed. The discovery that this was a dummy, and that the bed was clamped to the floor, instantly gave rise to the suspicion that the rope was there as a bridge for something passing through the hole and coming to the bed. The idea of a snake instantly occurred to me, and when I coupled it with my knowledge that the doctor was furnished with a supply of creatures from India, I felt that I was probably on the right track. The idea of using a form of poison which could not possibly be discovered by  any chemical test was  just such   a one as would occur to a clever and ruthless man who had had an Eastern training. The rapidity with which such a poison would take effect would also, from his point of view, be an advantage. It would be a sharp-eyed coroner, indeed, who could distin- guish the two little dark punctures which would show where the poison fangs had done their work. Then I thought of the whistle. Of course he must recall the snake before the morning light revealed it to the victim. He had trained it, probably by the use of the milk which we saw, to return to him when summoned. He would put it through this



ventilator at the hour that he thought best, with the certainty that it would crawl down the rope and land on the bed. It might or might not bite the occupant, perhaps she might escape every night for a week, but sooner or later she must fall a victim.
I had come to these conclusions before ever I had entered his room. An inspection of his chair showed me that he had been in the habit of stand- ing on it, which of course would be necessary in order that he should reach the ventilator. The sight of the safe, the saucer of milk, and the loop of whipcord were enough to finally dispel any doubts which may have remained. The metallic clang heard by Miss Stoner was obviously caused by her stepfather hastily closing the door of his safe upon
its terrible occupant. Having once made up my mind, you know the steps which I took in order to put the matter to the proof. I heard the creature hiss as I have no doubt that you did also, and I instantly lit the light and attacked it.
With the result of driving it through the venti- lator.
And also with the result of causing it to turn upon its master at the other side. Some of the blows of my cane came home and roused its snakish tem- per, so that it flew upon the first person it saw. In this way I am no doubt indirectly responsible for Dr. Grimesby Roylotts death, and I cannot say that it is likely to weigh very heavily upon my conscience.



























The Adventure of the Engineers Thumb





O
f all the problems which have been submitted to my friend, Mr. Sherlock Holmes, for solution during the years of our intimacy, there were only two which
I was the means of introducing to his noticethat of Mr. Hatherleys thumb, and that of Colonel War- burtons madness. Of these the latter may have afforded a finer field for an acute and original ob- server, but the other was so strange in its inception and so dramatic in its details that it may be the more worthy of being placed upon record, even if it gave my friend fewer openings for those deductive methods of reasoning by which he achieved such remarkable results. The story has, I believe, been told more than once in the newspapers, but, like  all such narratives, its effect is much less striking when set forth en bloc in a single half-column of print than when the facts slowly evolve before your own eyes,  and the mystery clears gradually away  as each new discovery furnishes a step which leads on to the complete truth. At the time the circum- stances made a deep impression upon me, and the lapse of two years has hardly served to weaken the effect.
It was in the summer of 89, not long after my marriage, that the events occurred which I am now about to summarise. I had returned to civil practice and had finally abandoned Holmes in his Baker Street rooms, although I continually visited him and occasionally even persuaded him to forgo his Bohemian habits so far as to come and visit us. My practice had steadily increased, and as I happened to live at no very great distance from Paddington Station, I got a few patients from among the offi- cials. One of these, whom I had cured of a painful and lingering disease, was never weary of adver- tising my virtues and of endeavouring to send me on every sufferer over whom he might have any influence.
One morning, at a little before seven oclock, I was awakened by the maid tapping at the door to announce that two men had come from Paddington and were waiting in the consulting-room. I dressed hurriedly, for I knew by experience that railway cases were seldom trivial, and hastened downstairs. As I descended, my old ally, the guard, came out of the room and closed the door tightly behind him.
Ive got him here, he whispered, jerking his thumb over his shoulder; hes all right.
What is it, then? I asked, for his manner sug- gested that it was some strange creature which he had caged up in my room.
Its a new patient, he whispered. I thought Id bring him round myself; then he couldnt slip
away. There he is, all safe and sound. I must go now, Doctor; I have my dooties, just the same as you. And off he went, this trusty tout, without even giving me time to thank him.
I entered my consulting-room and found a gen- tleman seated by the table. He was quietly dressed in a suit of heather tweed with a soft cloth cap which he had laid down upon my books. Round one of his hands he had a handkerchief wrapped, which was mottled all over with bloodstains. He was young, not more than five-and-twenty, I should say, with a strong, masculine face; but he was ex- ceedingly pale and gave me the impression of a man who was suffering from some strong agitation, which it took all his strength of mind to control.
I am sorry to knock you up so early, Doctor, said he, but I have had a very serious accident during the night. I came in by train this morning, and on inquiring at Paddington as to where I might find a doctor, a worthy fellow very kindly escorted me here. I gave the maid a card, but I see that she has left it upon the side-table.
I took it up and glanced at it. Mr. Victor Hather- ley, hydraulic engineer, 16A, Victoria Street (3rd floor). That was the name, style, and abode of my morning visitor. I regret that I have kept you wait- ing, said I, sitting down in my library-chair. You are fresh from a night journey, I understand, which is in itself a monotonous occupation.
Oh, my night could not be called monotonous, said he, and laughed. He laughed very heartily, with a high, ringing note, leaning back in his chair and shaking his sides. All my medical  instincts rose up against that laugh.
Stop it! I cried; pull yourself together! and  I poured out some water from a caraffe.
It  was  useless,  however.  He  was  off  in  one of those hysterical outbursts which come upon a strong nature when some great crisis is over and gone. Presently he came to himself once more, very weary and pale-looking.
I have been making a fool of myself, he gasped.
Not at all. Drink this. I dashed some brandy into the water, and the colour began to come back to his bloodless cheeks.
Thats better! said he. And now, Doctor, per- haps you would kindly attend to my thumb, or rather to the place where my thumb used to be.
He unwound the handkerchief and held out his hand. It gave even my hardened nerves a shudder to look at it. There were four protruding fingers and a horrid red, spongy surface where the thumb



should have been. It had been hacked or torn right out from the roots.
Good heavens! I cried, this is a terrible injury.
It must have bled considerably.
Yes,  it did.  I fainted when it was  done,  and    I think that I must have been senseless for a long time. When I came to I found that it was still bleed- ing, so I tied one end of my handkerchief very tightly round the wrist and braced it up with a twig.
Excellent! You should have been a surgeon. It is a question of hydraulics, you see, and
came within my own province.
This has been done, said I, examining the wound, by a very heavy and sharp instrument.
A thing like a cleaver, said he. An accident, I presume?
By no means.
What! a murderous attack? Very murderous indeed. You horrify me.
I sponged the wound, cleaned it, dressed it, and finally covered it over with cotton wadding and carbolised bandages. He lay back without wincing, though he bit his lip from time to time.
How is that? I asked when I had finished. Capital! Between your brandy and your ban-
dage, I feel a new man. I was very weak, but I have had a good deal to go through.
Perhaps you had better not speak of the matter.
It is evidently trying to your nerves.
Oh, no, not now. I shall have to tell my tale to the police; but, between ourselves, if it were not for the convincing evidence of this wound of mine, I should be surprised if they believed my statement, for it is a very extraordinary one, and I have not much in the way of proof with which to back it up; and, even if they believe me, the clues which I can give them are so vague that it is a question whether justice will be done.
Ha! cried I, if it is anything in the nature of  a problem which you desire to see solved, I should strongly recommend you to come to my  friend, Mr. Sherlock Holmes, before you go to the official police.
Oh, I have heard of that fellow, answered my visitor, and I should be very glad if  he  would take the matter up, though of course I must use the official police as well. Would you give me an introduction to him?
Ill do better. Ill take you round to him my- self.
I should be immensely  obliged  to  you. Well call a cab and go together. We shall just
be in time to have a little breakfast with him. Do you feel equal to it?
Yes; I shall not feel easy until I have told my story.
Then my servant will call a cab,  and I shall   be with you in an instant. I rushed upstairs, ex- plained the matter shortly to my wife, and in five minutes was inside a hansom, driving with my new acquaintance to Baker Street.
Sherlock Holmes was, as I expected, lounging about his sitting-room in his dressing-gown, read- ing the agony column of The Times and  smoking his before-breakfast pipe, which was composed of all the plugs and dottles left from his smokes of the day before, all carefully dried and collected on the corner of the mantelpiece. He received us in his quietly genial fashion, ordered fresh rashers and eggs, and joined us in a hearty meal. When it was concluded he settled our new acquaintance upon the sofa, placed a pillow beneath his head, and laid a glass of brandy and water within his reach.
It is easy to see that your experience has been no common one, Mr. Hatherley, said he. Pray, lie down there and make yourself absolutely at home. Tell us what you can, but stop when you are tired and keep up your strength with a little stimulant.
Thank you, said my patient. but I have felt another man since the doctor bandaged me, and I think that your breakfast has completed the cure.   I shall take up as little of your valuable time as possible, so I shall start at once upon my peculiar experiences.
Holmes sat in his big armchair with the weary, heavy-lidded expression which veiled his keen and eager nature, while I sat opposite to him, and we listened in silence to the strange story which our visitor detailed to us.
You must know, said he, that I am an or- phan and a bachelor, residing  alone  in  lodgings in London. By profession I am a hydraulic engi- neer, and I have had considerable experience of my work during the seven years that I was apprenticed to Venner & Matheson, the well-known firm, of Greenwich. Two years ago, having served my time, and having also come into a fair sum of money through my poor fathers death, I determined to start in business for myself and took professional chambers in Victoria Street.



I suppose that everyone finds his first inde- pendent start in business a dreary experience. To me it has been exceptionally so.  During two  years I have had three consultations and one small job, and that is absolutely all that my profession has brought me. My gross takings amount to 27 10s. Every day, from nine in the morning until four in the afternoon, I waited in my little den, until at last my heart began to sink, and I came to believe that I should never have any practice at all.
Yesterday, however, just as I was thinking of leaving the office, my clerk entered to say there  was a gentleman waiting who wished to see me upon business. He brought up a card, too, with the name of Colonel Lysander Stark engraved upon  it. Close at his heels came the colonel himself, a man rather over the middle size, but of an exceed- ing thinness. I do not think that I have ever  seen  so thin a man. His whole face  sharpened  away into nose and chin, and the skin of his cheeks was drawn quite tense over his outstanding bones. Yet this emaciation seemed to be his natural habit, and due to no disease, for his eye was bright, his step brisk, and his bearing assured. He was plainly but neatly dressed, and his age, I should judge, would be nearer forty than thirty.
 Mr. Hatherley? said he, with something of a German accent. You have been recommended to me, Mr. Hatherley, as being a man who is not only proficient in his profession but is also discreet and capable of preserving a secret.
I bowed, feeling as flattered as any young man would at such an address. May I ask who it was who gave me so good a character?
 Well, perhaps it is better that I should not tell you that just at this moment. I have it from the same source that you are both an orphan and a bachelor and are residing alone in London.
 That is quite correct, I answered; but you will excuse me if I say that I cannot see how all  this bears upon my professional qualifications. I understand that it was on a professional matter that you wished to speak to me?
 Undoubtedly so.   But you  will find that all    I say is really to the point. I have a professional commission for you, but absolute secrecy is quite essentialabsolute secrecy, you understand, and of course we may expect that more from a man who is alone than from one who lives in the bosom of his family.
 If I promise to keep a secret, said I, you may absolutely depend upon my doing so.
He looked very hard at me as I spoke, and it seemed to me that I had never seen so suspicious and questioning an eye.
 Do you promise, then? said he at last.  Yes, I promise.
 Absolute and complete silence before, during, and after? No reference to the matter at all, either in word or writing?
 I have already given you my word.
 Very good. He suddenly sprang up, and dart- ing like lightning across the room he flung open the door. The passage outside was empty.
 Thats all right, said he, coming back. I know that clerks are sometimes curious as to their mas- ters affairs. Now we can talk in safety. He drew  up his chair very close to mine and began to stare at me again with the same questioning and thoughtful look.
A feeling of repulsion, and of something akin to fear had begun to rise within me at the strange antics of this fleshless man. Even my dread of los- ing a client could not restrain me from showing my impatience.
 I beg that you will state your business, sir, said I; my time is of value. Heaven forgive me for that last sentence, but the words came to my lips.
 How would fifty guineas for a nights work suit you? he asked.
 Most admirably.
 I say a nights work, but an hours would be nearer the mark. I simply want your opinion about a hydraulic stamping machine which has got out of gear. If you show us what is wrong we shall soon set it right ourselves. What do you think of such a commission as that?
 The work appears to be light and the pay munificent.
 Precisely so. We shall want you to come to- night by the last train.
 Where to?
 To Eyford, in Berkshire. It is a little place near the borders of Oxfordshire, and within seven miles of Reading. There is a train from Paddington which would bring you there at about 11.15.
 Very good.
 I shall come down in a carriage to meet you.  There is a drive, then?
 Yes, our little place is quite out in the country.
It is a good seven miles from Eyford Station.
 Then we can hardly get there before midnight. I suppose there would be no chance of a train back. I should be compelled to stop the night.
 Yes, we could easily give you a shake-down.



 That is very awkward. Could I not come at some more convenient hour?
 We have judged it best that you should come late. It is to recompense you for any inconvenience that we are paying to you, a young and unknown man, a fee which would buy an opinion from the very heads of your profession. Still, of course, if you would like to draw out of the business, there  is plenty of time to do so.
I thought of the fifty guineas, and of how very useful they would be to me.   Not at all,  said I,      I shall be very happy to accommodate myself to your wishes. I should like, however, to understand a little more clearly what it is that you wish me to do.
 Quite so. It is very natural that the pledge of secrecy which we have exacted from you should have aroused your curiosity. I have no wish to com- mit you to anything without your having it all laid before you. I suppose that we are absolutely safe from eavesdroppers?
 Entirely.
 Then the matter stands thus. You are proba- bly aware that fullers-earth is a valuable product, and that it is only found in one or two places in England?
 I have heard so.
 Some little time ago I bought a small placea very small placewithin ten miles of Reading. I was fortunate enough to discover that there was a deposit of fullers-earth in one of my fields. On ex- amining it, however, I found that this deposit was a comparatively small one, and that it formed a link between two very much larger ones upon the right and leftboth of them, however, in the grounds of my neighbours. These good people were absolutely ignorant that their land contained that which was quite as valuable as a gold-mine. Naturally, it was to my interest to buy their land before they dis- covered its true value, but unfortunately I had no capital by which I could do this. I took a few of my friends into the secret, however, and they suggested that we should quietly and secretly work our own little deposit and that in this way we should earn the money which would enable us to buy the neigh- bouring fields. This we have now been doing for some time, and in order to help us in our operations we erected a hydraulic press. This press, as I have already explained, has got out of order, and we wish your advice upon the subject. We guard our secret very jealously, however, and if it once became known that we had hydraulic engineers coming to our little house, it would soon rouse inquiry, and
then, if the facts came out, it would be good-bye to any chance of getting these fields and carrying out our plans. That is why I have made you promise me that you will not tell a human being that you are going to Eyford to-night. I hope that I make it all plain?
 I quite follow you, said I. The only point which I could not quite understand was what use you could make of a hydraulic press in excavating fullers-earth, which, as I understand, is dug out like gravel from a pit.
 Ah! said he carelessly, we have our own pro- cess. We compress the earth into bricks, so as to remove them without revealing what they are. But that is a mere detail. I have taken you fully into my confidence now, Mr. Hatherley, and I have shown you how I trust you. He rose as he spoke. I shall expect you, then, at Eyford at 11.15.
 I shall certainly be there.
 And not a word to a soul. He looked at me with a last long, questioning gaze, and then, press- ing my hand in a cold, dank grasp, he hurried from the room.
Well, when I came to think it all over in cool blood I was very much astonished, as you may both think, at this sudden commission which had been intrusted to me. On the one hand, of course, I was glad, for the fee was at least tenfold what I should have asked had I set a price upon my own services, and it was possible that this order might lead to other ones. On the other hand, the face and manner of my patron had made an unpleasant impression upon me, and I could not think that his explana- tion of the fullers-earth was sufficient to explain the necessity for my coming at midnight, and his extreme anxiety lest I should tell anyone of my er- rand.  However,  I threw all fears to the winds, ate  a hearty supper, drove to Paddington, and started off, having obeyed to the letter the injunction as to holding my tongue.
At Reading I had to change not only my car- riage but my station. However, I was  in time for  the last train to Eyford, and I reached the little dim-lit station after eleven oclock. I was the only passenger who got out there, and there was no one upon the platform save a single sleepy porter with  a lantern. As I passed out through the wicket gate, however, I found my acquaintance of the morning waiting in the shadow upon the other side. Without a word he grasped my arm and hurried me into a carriage, the door of which was standing open. He drew up the windows on either side, tapped on the wood-work, and away we went as fast as the horse could go.



One horse? interjected Holmes. Yes, only one.
Did you observe the colour?
Yes, I saw it by the side-lights when I was stepping into the carriage. It was a chestnut.
Tired-looking or fresh? Oh, fresh and glossy.
Thank you. I am sorry to have interrupted you.
Pray continue your most interesting statement.
Away we went then, and we drove  for at least an hour. Colonel Lysander Stark had said that it was only seven miles, but I should think, from the rate that we seemed to go, and from the time that we took, that it must have been nearer twelve. He sat at my side in silence all the time, and I was aware, more than once when I glanced in his direc- tion, that he was looking at me with great intensity. The country roads seem to be not very good  in that part of the world, for we lurched and jolted terribly. I tried to look out of the windows to see something of where we were, but they were made of frosted glass, and I could make out nothing save the occasional bright blur of a passing light. Now and then I hazarded some remark to break the monotony of the journey, but the colonel answered only in monosyllables, and the conversation soon flagged. At last, however, the bumping of the road was exchanged for the crisp smoothness of a gravel- drive, and the carriage came to a stand. Colonel Lysander Stark sprang out, and, as I followed after him, pulled me swiftly into a porch which gaped   in front of us.  We  stepped,  as it were,  right out   of the carriage and into the hall, so that I failed to catch the most fleeting glance of the front of the house. The instant that I had crossed the threshold the door slammed heavily behind us, and I heard faintly the rattle of the wheels as the carriage drove away.
It was pitch dark inside the house, and the colonel fumbled about looking for matches and muttering under his breath. Suddenly a door opened at the other end of the passage, and a long, golden bar of light shot out in our direction. It grew broader, and a woman appeared with a lamp in  her hand, which she held above her head, pushing her face forward and peering at us. I could see that she was pretty, and from the gloss with which the light shone upon her dark dress I knew that it was a rich material. She spoke a few words in a foreign tongue in a tone as though asking a question, and when my companion answered in a gruff mono- syllable she gave such a start that the lamp nearly fell from her hand. Colonel Stark went up to her,
whispered something in her ear, and then, pushing her back into the room from whence she had come, he walked towards me again with the lamp in his hand.
 Perhaps you will have the  kindness  to  wait in this room for a few minutes, said he, throwing open another door. It was a quiet, little, plainly furnished room, with a round table in the centre, on which several German books were scattered. Colonel Stark laid down the lamp on the top of a harmonium beside the door. I shall not keep you waiting an instant, said he, and vanished into the darkness.
I glanced at the books upon the table, and in spite of my ignorance of German I could see that two of them were treatises on science, the others be- ing volumes of poetry. Then I walked across to the window, hoping that I might catch some glimpse of the country-side, but an oak shutter, heavily barred, was folded across it. It was a wonderfully silent house. There was an old clock ticking loudly some- where in the passage, but otherwise everything was deadly still.  A vague feeling of uneasiness began  to steal over me. Who were these German people, and what were they doing living in this strange, out-of-the-way place?  And where was  the place?   I was ten miles or so from Eyford, that was all I knew, but whether north, south, east, or west I had no idea. For that matter, Reading, and possibly other large towns, were within that radius, so the place might not be so secluded, after all. Yet it was quite certain, from the absolute stillness, that we were in the country. I paced up and down the room, humming a tune under my breath to keep up my spirits and feeling that I was thoroughly earning my fifty-guinea fee.
Suddenly, without any preliminary sound in the midst of the utter stillness, the door of my room swung slowly open. The woman was standing in the aperture, the darkness of the hall behind her, the yellow light from my lamp beating upon her eager and beautiful face. I could see at a glance that she was sick with fear, and the sight sent a chill to my own heart. She held up one shaking finger to warn me to be silent, and she shot a few whispered words of broken English at me, her eyes glancing back, like those of a frightened horse, into the gloom behind her.
 I would go, said she, trying hard, as it seemed to me, to speak calmly; I would go. I should not stay here. There is no good for you to do.
 But, madam, said I, I have not yet done what I came for. I cannot possibly leave until I have seen the machine.



 It is not worth your while to wait, she went on. You can pass through the door; no one hin- ders. And then, seeing that I smiled and shook my head, she suddenly threw aside her constraint and made a step forward, with her hands wrung together. For the love of Heaven! she whispered, get away from here before it is too late!
But I am somewhat headstrong by nature, and the more ready to engage in an affair when there  is some obstacle in the way. I thought of my fifty- guinea fee, of my wearisome journey, and of the unpleasant night which seemed to be before me. Was it all to go for nothing? Why should I slink away without having carried out my commission, and without the payment which was my due? This woman might, for all I knew, be a monomaniac. With a stout bearing, therefore, though her man- ner had shaken me more than I cared to confess, I still shook my head and declared my intention of remaining where I was. She was about to renew  her entreaties when a door slammed overhead, and the sound of several footsteps was heard upon the stairs. She listened for an instant, threw up her hands with a despairing gesture, and vanished as suddenly and as noiselessly as she had come.
The newcomers were Colonel Lysander Stark and a short thick man with a chinchilla beard grow- ing out of the creases of his double chin, who was introduced to me as Mr. Ferguson.
 This is my secretary and manager, said the colonel. By the way, I was under the impression that I left this door shut just now. I fear that you have felt the draught.
 On the contrary, said I, I opened the door myself because I felt the room to be a little close.
He shot one of his suspicious looks at me. Per- haps we had better proceed to business, then, said he. Mr. Ferguson and I will take you up to see the machine.
 I had better put my hat on, I suppose.  Oh, no, it is in the house.
 What, you dig fullers-earth in the house?
 No, no. This is only where we compress it. But never mind that. All we wish you to do is to examine the machine and to let us know what is wrong with it.
We went upstairs together, the colonel first with the lamp, the fat manager and I behind him. It was a labyrinth of an old house, with corridors, passages, narrow winding staircases, and little low doors, the thresholds of which were hollowed out by the generations who had crossed them. There were no carpets and no signs of any furniture above
the ground floor, while the plaster was peeling off the walls, and the damp was breaking through in green, unhealthy blotches. I tried to put on as un- concerned an air as possible, but I had not forgotten the warnings of the lady, even though I disregarded them, and I kept a keen eye upon my two compan- ions. Ferguson appeared to be a morose and silent man, but I could see from the little that he said that he was at least a fellow-countryman.
Colonel Lysander Stark stopped at last before a low door, which he unlocked. Within was a small, square room, in which the three of us could hardly get at one time. Ferguson remained outside, and the colonel ushered me in.
 We are now, said he, actually within the hydraulic press, and it would be a particularly un- pleasant thing for us if anyone were to turn it on. The ceiling of this small chamber is really the end of the descending piston, and it comes down with the force of many tons upon this metal floor. There are small lateral columns of water outside which receive the force, and which transmit and multi- ply it in the manner which is familiar to you. The machine goes readily enough, but there is some stiffness in the working of it, and it has lost a little of its force. Perhaps you will have the goodness to look it over and to show us how we can set it  right.
I took the lamp from him, and I examined the machine very thoroughly. It was indeed a gigantic one, and capable of exercising enormous pressure. When I passed outside, however, and pressed down the levers which controlled it, I knew at once by  the whishing sound that there was a slight leakage, which allowed a regurgitation of water through one of the side cylinders. An examination showed that one of the india-rubber bands which was round the head of a driving-rod had shrunk so as not quite   to fill the socket along which it worked. This was clearly the cause of the loss of power, and I pointed it out to my companions, who followed my remarks very carefully and asked several practical questions as to how they should proceed to set it right. When I had made it clear to them, I returned to the main chamber of the machine and took a good look at    it to satisfy my own curiosity. It was obvious at a glance that the story of the fullers-earth was the merest fabrication, for it would be absurd to sup- pose that so powerful an engine could be designed for so inadequate a purpose. The walls were of wood, but the floor consisted of a large iron trough, and when I came to examine it I could see a crust of metallic deposit all over it. I had stooped and was scraping at this to see exactly what it was when I heard a muttered exclamation in German and  saw



the cadaverous face of the colonel looking down at me.
 What are you doing there? he asked.
I felt angry at having been tricked by so elab- orate a story as that which he had told me. I was admiring your fullers-earth,  said I; I think that    I should be better able to advise you as to your machine if I knew what the exact purpose was for which it was used.
The instant that I uttered the words I regretted the rashness of my speech. His face set hard, and a baleful light sprang up in his grey eyes.
 Very well, said he, you shall know all about the machine. He took a step backward, slammed the little door, and turned the key in the lock. I rushed towards it and pulled at the handle, but it was quite secure, and did not give in the least to my kicks and shoves. Hullo! I yelled. Hullo! Colonel! Let me out!
And then suddenly in the silence I heard a sound which sent my heart into my mouth. It was the clank of the levers and the swish of the leak- ing cylinder. He had set the engine at work. The lamp still stood upon the floor where I had placed it when examining the trough. By its light I saw that the black ceiling was coming down upon me, slowly, jerkily, but, as none knew better than my- self, with a force which must within a minute grind me to a shapeless pulp. I threw myself, scream- ing, against the door,  and dragged with my nails  at the lock. I implored the colonel to let me out, but the remorseless clanking of the levers drowned my cries. The ceiling was only a foot or two above my head, and with my hand upraised I could feel its hard, rough surface. Then it flashed through  my mind that the pain of my death would depend very much upon the position in which I met it.  If   I lay on my face the weight would come upon my spine, and I shuddered to think of that dreadful snap. Easier the other way,  perhaps;  and yet,  had I the nerve to lie and look up at that deadly black shadow wavering down upon me? Already I was unable to stand erect, when my eye caught some- thing which brought a gush of hope back to my heart.
I have said that though the floor and ceiling were of iron, the walls were of wood. As I gave a  last hurried glance around, I saw a thin line of yel- low light between two of the boards, which broad- ened and broadened as a small panel was pushed backward. For an instant I could hardly believe that here was indeed a door which led away from death. The next instant I threw myself through, and lay half-fainting upon the other side. The panel had
closed again behind me, but the crash of the lamp, and a few moments afterwards the clang of the two slabs of metal, told me how narrow had been my escape.
I was recalled to myself by a frantic plucking  at my wrist, and I found myself lying upon the stone floor of a narrow corridor, while a woman bent over me and tugged at me with her left hand, while she held a candle in her right. It was the same good friend whose warning I had so foolishly rejected.
 Come! come! she cried breathlessly. They will be here in a moment. They will see that you are not there. Oh, do not waste the so-precious time, but come!
This time, at least, I did not scorn her advice.  I staggered to my feet and ran with her along the corridor and down a winding stair. The latter led to another broad passage, and just as we reached it we heard the sound of running feet and the shouting of two voices, one answering the other from the floor on which we were and from the one beneath. My guide stopped and looked about her like one who  is at her wits end. Then she threw open a door which led into a bedroom, through the window of which the moon was shining brightly.
 It is your only chance, said she. It is high, but it may be that you can jump it.
As she spoke a light sprang into view at the further end of the passage, and I saw the lean figure of Colonel Lysander Stark rushing forward with a lantern in one hand and a weapon like a butchers cleaver in the other. I rushed across the bedroom, flung open the window, and looked out. How quiet and sweet and wholesome the garden looked  in the moonlight, and it could not be more than thirty feet down. I clambered out upon the sill, but I hesitated to jump until I should have heard what passed between my saviour and the ruffian who pursued me. If she were ill-used, then at any risks  I was determined to go back to her assistance. The thought had hardly flashed through my mind be- fore he was at the door, pushing his way past her; but she threw her arms round him and tried to hold him back.
 Fritz! Fritz! she cried in English, remember your promise after the last time. You said it should not be again. He will be silent! Oh, he will be silent!
 You are mad, Elise! he shouted, struggling to break away from her. You will be the ruin of us. He has seen too much. Let me pass, I say! He dashed her to one side, and, rushing to the window, cut at me with his heavy weapon. I had let myself



go, and was hanging by the hands to the sill, when his blow fell. I was conscious of a dull pain, my grip loosened, and I fell into the garden below.
I was shaken but not hurt by the fall; so I picked myself up and rushed off among the bushes as hard as I could run, for I understood that I was far from being out of danger yet. Suddenly, how- ever, as I ran, a deadly dizziness and sickness came over me. I glanced down at my hand, which was throbbing painfully, and then, for the first time, saw that my thumb had been cut off and that the blood was pouring from my wound. I endeavoured to tie my handkerchief round it, but there came a sudden buzzing in my ears, and next moment I fell in a dead faint among the rose-bushes.
How long I remained unconscious I cannot tell. It must have been a very long time, for the moon had sunk, and a bright morning was breaking when I came to myself. My clothes were all sodden with dew, and my coat-sleeve was drenched with blood from my wounded thumb. The smarting of it re- called in an instant all the particulars of my nights adventure, and I sprang to my feet with the feeling that I might hardly yet be safe from my pursuers. But to my astonishment, when I came to look round me, neither house nor garden were to be seen. I had been lying in an angle of the hedge close by the highroad, and just a little lower down was a long building, which proved, upon my approaching it,  to be the very station at which I had arrived upon the previous night. Were it not for the ugly wound upon my hand, all that had passed during those dreadful hours might have been an evil dream.
Half dazed, I went into the station and asked about the morning train. There would be one to Reading in less than an hour. The same porter was on duty, I found, as had been there when I arrived. I inquired of him whether he had ever heard of Colonel Lysander Stark. The name was strange to him. Had he observed a carriage the night before waiting for me? No, he had not. Was there a police- station anywhere near? There was one about three miles off.
It was too far for me to go, weak and ill as I was. I determined to wait until I got back to town before telling my story to the police. It was  a lit-  tle past six when I arrived, so I went first to have my wound dressed, and then the doctor was kind enough to bring me along here. I put the case into your hands and shall do exactly what you advise.
We both sat in silence for some little time after listening to this extraordinary narrative. Then Sher- lock Holmes pulled down from the shelf one of the
ponderous commonplace books in which he placed his cuttings.
Here is an advertisement which will interest you, said he. It appeared in all the papers about a year ago. Listen to this:
 Lost, on the 9th inst., Mr. Jeremiah Hayling, aged twenty-six, a hydraulic en- gineer. Left his lodgings at ten oclock at night, and has not been heard of since. Was dressed in
etc., etc. Ha! That represents the last time that the colonel needed to have his machine overhauled, I fancy.
Good heavens! cried my patient. Then that explains what the girl said.
Undoubtedly. It is quite clear that the colonel was a cool and desperate man, who was absolutely determined that nothing should stand in the way of his little game, like those out-and-out pirates who will leave no survivor from a captured ship. Well, every moment now is precious, so if you feel equal to it we shall go down to Scotland Yard at once as a preliminary to starting for Eyford.
Some three hours or  so  afterwards  we  were all in the train together, bound from Reading to the little Berkshire village. There were Sherlock Holmes, the hydraulic engineer, Inspector Brad- street, of Scotland Yard, a plain-clothes man, and myself. Bradstreet had spread an ordnance map of the county out upon the seat and was busy with  his compasses drawing a circle with Eyford for its centre.
There you are, said he. That circle is drawn at a radius of ten miles from the village. The place we want must be somewhere near that line. You said ten miles, I think, sir.
It was an hours good drive.
And you think that they brought you back all that way when you were unconscious?
They must have done so. I have a confused memory, too, of having been lifted and conveyed somewhere.
What I cannot understand, said I, is why they should have spared you when they found you lying fainting in the garden. Perhaps the villain was softened by the womans entreaties.
I hardly think that likely. I never saw a more inexorable face in my life.
Oh, we shall soon clear up all that, said Brad- street. Well, I have drawn my circle, and I only wish I knew at what point upon it the folk that we are in search of are to be found.
I think I could lay my finger on it, said Holmes quietly.



Really, now! cried the inspector, you have formed your opinion! Come, now, we shall see who agrees with you. I say it is south, for the country is more deserted there.
And I say east, said my patient.
I am for west, remarked the plain-clothes man. There are several quiet little villages up there.
And I am for north, said I, because there are no hills there, and our friend says that he did not notice the carriage go up any.
Come, cried the inspector, laughing; its a very pretty diversity of opinion. We have boxed the compass among us. Who do you give your casting vote to?
You are all wrong. But we cant all be.
Oh, yes, you can. This is my point. He placed his finger in the centre of the circle. This is where we shall find them.
But the twelve-mile drive? gasped Hatherley.
Six out and six back. Nothing simpler. You say yourself that the horse was fresh and glossy when you got in. How could it be that if it had gone twelve miles over heavy roads?
Indeed, it is a likely ruse enough, observed Bradstreet thoughtfully. Of course there can be no doubt as to the nature of this gang.
None at all, said Holmes. They are coiners on a large scale, and have used the machine to form the amalgam which has taken the place of silver.
We have known for some time that a clever gang was at work, said the inspector. They have been turning out half-crowns by the thousand. We even traced them as far as Reading, but could get no farther, for they had covered their traces in a way that showed that they were very old  hands. But now, thanks to this lucky chance, I think that we have got them right enough.
But the inspector was mistaken, for those crim- inals were not destined to fall into the hands of justice. As we rolled into Eyford Station we saw a gigantic column of smoke which streamed up from behind a small clump of trees in the neighbourhood and hung like an immense ostrich feather over the landscape.
A house on fire? asked Bradstreet as the train steamed off again on its way.
Yes, sir! said the station-master. When did it break out?
I hear that it was during the night, sir, but it has got worse, and the whole place is in a blaze.
Whose house is it? Dr. Bechers.
Tell me, broke in the engineer, is Dr. Becher a German, very thin, with a long, sharp nose?
The station-master laughed heartily. No, sir, Dr. Becher is an Englishman, and there isnt a man in the parish who has a better-lined waistcoat. But he has a gentleman staying with him, a patient, as I understand, who is a foreigner, and he looks as if a little good Berkshire beef would do him no harm.
The station-master had not finished his speech before we were all hastening in the direction of the fire. The road topped a low hill, and there was a great widespread whitewashed building in front of us, spouting fire at every chink and window, while in the garden in front three fire-engines were vainly striving to keep the flames under.
Thats it! cried Hatherley, in intense excite- ment. There is the gravel-drive, and there are the rose-bushes where I lay. That second window is  the one that I jumped from.
Well, at least, said Holmes, you have had your revenge upon them. There can be no ques- tion that it was your oil-lamp which, when it was crushed in the press, set fire to the wooden walls, though no doubt they were too excited in the chase after you to observe it at the time. Now keep your eyes open in this crowd for your friends of last night, though I very much fear that they are a good hundred miles off by now.
And Holmes fears came to be realised, for from that day to this no word has ever been heard either of the beautiful woman, the sinister German, or the morose Englishman. Early that morning a peasant had met a cart containing several people and some very bulky boxes driving rapidly in the direction   of Reading, but there all traces of the fugitives dis- appeared, and even Holmes ingenuity failed ever to discover the least clue as to their whereabouts.
The firemen had been much perturbed at the strange arrangements which they had found within, and still more so by discovering a newly severed human thumb upon a window-sill of the second floor. About sunset, however, their efforts were at last successful, and they subdued the flames, but not before the roof had fallen in, and the whole place been reduced to such absolute ruin that, save some twisted cylinders and iron piping, not a trace remained of the machinery which had cost our un- fortunate acquaintance so dearly. Large masses of nickel and of tin were discovered stored in an out- house, but no coins were to be found, which may have explained the presence of those bulky boxes which have been already referred to.



How our hydraulic engineer had been conveyed from the garden to the spot where he recovered   his senses might have remained forever a mystery were it not for the soft mould, which told us a very plain tale. He had evidently been carried down by two persons, one of whom had remarkably small feet and the other unusually large ones. On the whole, it was most probable that the silent English- man, being less bold or less murderous than his companion, had assisted the woman to bear the unconscious man out of the way of danger.
Well, said our engineer ruefully as we took our seats to return once more to London, it has been a pretty business for me! I have lost my thumb and I have lost a fifty-guinea fee, and what have I gained?

Experience, said Holmes, laughing. Indi- rectly it may be of value, you know; you have only to put it into words to gain the reputation of be- ing excellent company for the remainder of your existence.



























The Adventure of the Noble Bachelor





T
he Lord St. Simon marriage, and its curi- ous termination, have long ceased to be  a subject of interest in those exalted cir- cles in which the unfortunate bridegroom
moves. Fresh scandals have eclipsed it, and their more piquant details have drawn the gossips away from this four-year-old drama. As I have reason to believe, however, that the full facts have never been revealed to the general public, and as my friend Sherlock Holmes had a considerable share in clear- ing the matter up, I feel that no memoir of him would be complete without some little sketch of this remarkable episode.
It was a few weeks before my own marriage, during the days when I was still sharing rooms with Holmes in Baker Street, that he came home from an afternoon stroll to find a letter on the table waiting for him. I had remained indoors all day, for the weather had taken a sudden turn to rain, with high autumnal winds, and the Jezail bullet which   I had brought back in one of my limbs as a relic    of my Afghan campaign throbbed with dull per- sistence. With my body in one easy-chair and my legs upon another, I had surrounded myself with   a cloud of newspapers until at last, saturated with the news of the day,  I tossed them all aside and   lay listless, watching the huge crest and monogram upon the envelope upon the table and wondering lazily who my friends noble correspondent could be.
Here is a very fashionable epistle, I remarked as he entered. Your morning letters, if I remember right, were from a fish-monger and a tide-waiter.
Yes, my correspondence has certainly the charm of variety, he answered, smiling, and the humbler are usually the more interesting. This looks like one of those unwelcome social sum- monses which call upon a man either to be bored or to lie.
He broke the seal and glanced over the contents. Oh, come, it may prove to be something of
interest, after all. Not social, then?
No, distinctly professional. And from  a  noble  client? One of the highest in England.
My dear fellow, I congratulate you.
I assure you, Watson, without affectation, that the status of my client is a matter of less moment to me than the interest of his case. It is just possi- ble, however, that that also may not be wanting in this new investigation. You have been reading the papers diligently of late, have you not?
It looks like it, said I ruefully, pointing to a huge bundle in the corner. I have had nothing else to do.
It is fortunate,  for you  will perhaps be able  to post me up. I read nothing except the criminal news and the agony column. The latter is always instructive. But if you have followed recent events so closely you must have read about Lord St. Simon and his wedding?
Oh, yes, with the deepest interest.
That is well. The letter which I hold in my hand is from Lord St. Simon. I will read it to you, and in return you must turn over these papers and let me have whatever bears upon the matter. This is what he says:
 My dear Mr. Sherlock Holmes:
 Lord Backwater tells me that I may place implicit reliance upon your judg- ment and discretion. I have determined, therefore, to call upon you and to con- sult you in reference to the very painful event which has occurred in connection with my wedding. Mr. Lestrade, of Scot- land Yard, is acting already in the mat- ter, but he assures me that he sees no objection to your co-operation, and that he even thinks that it might be of some assistance. I will call at four oclock in the afternoon, and, should you have any other engagement at that time, I hope that you will postpone it, as this matter is of paramount importance.
  Yours faithfully,  St. Simon.
It is dated from Grosvenor Mansions, written with a quill pen, and the noble lord has had the misfortune to get a smear of ink upon the outer side of his right little finger, remarked Holmes as he folded up the epistle.
He says four oclock. It is three now. He will be here in an hour.
Then I have just time,  with  your  assistance, to get clear upon the subject. Turn over those pa- pers and arrange the extracts in their order of time, while I take a glance as to who our client is. He picked a red-covered volume from a line of books of reference beside the mantelpiece. Here he is, said he, sitting down and flattening  it  out  upon his knee.  Lord Robert Walsingham de Vere St. Simon, second son of the Duke of Balmoral. Hum! Arms: Azure, three caltrops in chief over a fess sable. Born in 1846. Hes forty-one years of age, which is mature for marriage. Was Under-Secretary



for the colonies in a late administration. The Duke, his father, was at one time Secretary for Foreign Affairs. They inherit Plantagenet blood by direct descent, and Tudor on the distaff side. Ha! Well, there is nothing very instructive in all this. I think that I must turn to you Watson, for something more solid.
I have very little difficulty in finding what I want, said I, for the facts are quite recent, and the matter struck me as remarkable. I feared to refer them to you, however, as I knew that you had an inquiry on hand and that you disliked the intrusion of other matters.
Oh, you mean the little problem of the Grosvenor Square furniture van. That is quite cleared up nowthough, indeed, it was obvious from the first. Pray give me the results of your newspaper selections.
Here is the first notice which I can find. It is in the personal column of the Morning Post, and dates, as you see, some weeks back:
 A marriage has been arranged [it says] and will, if rumour is correct, very shortly take place, between Lord Robert St. Simon, second son of the Duke of Balmoral, and Miss Hatty Doran, the only daughter of Aloysius Doran. Esq., of San Francisco, Cal., U.S.A.
That is all.
Terse and to the point, remarked Holmes, stretching his long, thin legs towards the fire.
There was a paragraph amplifying this in one of the society papers of the same week. Ah, here it is:
 There will soon be a call for protection in the marriage market, for the present free-trade principle appears to tell heavily against our home product. One by one the management of the noble houses of Great Britain is passing into the hands of our fair cousins from across the Atlantic. An important addition has been made during the last week to the list of the prizes which have been borne away by these charming invaders. Lord St. Simon, who has shown himself for over twenty years proof against the little gods arrows, has now definitely announced his approaching marriage with Miss Hatty Doran, the fascinating daugh- ter of a California millionaire. Miss Do- ran, whose graceful figure and striking face attracted much attention at the Westbury House festivities, is an only child, and it is
currently reported that her dowry will run to considerably over the six figures, with expectancies for the future. As it is an open secret that the Duke of Balmoral has been compelled to sell his pictures within the last few years, and as Lord St. Simon has no property of his own save the small estate  of Birchmoor, it is obvious that the Califor- nian heiress is not the only gainer by an alliance which will enable her to make the easy and common transition from a Repub- lican lady to a British peeress. 
Anything else? asked Holmes, yawning.
Oh, yes; plenty. Then there is another note in the Morning Post to say that  the  marriage  would be an absolutely quiet one, that it would be at St. Georges, Hanover Square, that only half a dozen in- timate friends would be invited, and that the party would return to the furnished house at Lancaster Gate which has been taken by Mr. Aloysius Doran. Two days laterthat is, on Wednesday lastthere is a curt announcement that the wedding had taken place,  and that the honeymoon would be passed  at Lord Backwaters place, near Petersfield. Those are all the notices which appeared before the disap- pearance of the bride.
Before the what? asked Holmes with a start. The vanishing of the lady.
When did she vanish, then? At the wedding breakfast.
Indeed. This is more interesting than it promised to be; quite dramatic, in fact.
Yes; it struck me as being a little out of the common.
They often vanish before the ceremony, and occasionally during the honeymoon; but I cannot call to mind anything quite so prompt as this. Pray let me have the details.
I warn you that they are very incomplete. Perhaps we may make them less so.
Such as they are, they are set forth in a single article of a morning paper of yesterday, which I  will read to you. It is headed, Singular Occurrence at a Fashionable Wedding:
 The family of Lord Robert St. Simon has been thrown into the greatest consterna- tion by the strange and painful episodes which have taken place in connection with his wedding. The ceremony, as shortly announced in the papers of yesterday, oc- curred on the previous morning; but it is only now that it has been possible to con- firm the strange rumours which have been so persistently floating about. In spite of



the attempts of the friends to hush the mat- ter up, so much public attention has now been drawn to it that no good purpose can be served by affecting to disregard what is a common subject for conversation.
 The ceremony, which was performed at St. Georges, Hanover Square, was a very quiet one, no one being present save the father of the bride, Mr. Aloysius  Doran, the Duchess of Balmoral, Lord Backwater, Lord Eustace and Lady Clara St. Simon (the younger brother and sister of the bride- groom), and Lady Alicia Whittington. The whole party proceeded afterwards to the house of Mr. Aloysius Doran, at Lancaster Gate, where breakfast had been prepared. It appears that some little trouble was caused by a woman, whose name has not been ascertained, who endeavoured to force her way into the house after the bridal party, alleging that she had some claim upon Lord St. Simon. It was  only  after  a  painful and prolonged scene that she was ejected by the butler and the footman. The bride, who had fortunately entered the house be- fore this unpleasant interruption, had sat down to breakfast with the rest, when she complained of a sudden indisposition and retired to her room. Her prolonged absence having caused some comment, her father followed her, but learned from her maid that she had only come up to her chamber for an instant, caught up an ulster and bon- net, and hurried down to the passage. One of the footmen declared that he had seen a lady leave the house thus apparelled, but had refused to credit that it was his mis- tress, believing her to be with the com- pany. On ascertaining that his daughter had disappeared, Mr. Aloysius Doran, in conjunction with the bridegroom, instantly put themselves in communication with the police, and very energetic inquiries are be- ing made, which  will  probably  result  in a speedy clearing up of this very singu-   lar business. Up to a late hour last night, however, nothing had transpired as to the whereabouts of the missing lady. There are rumours of foul play in the matter, and it is said that the police have caused the arrest of the woman who had caused the original dis- turbance, in the belief that, from jealousy or some other motive, she may have been con- cerned in the strange disappearance of the bride. 
And is that all?
Only one little item in another of the morning papers, but it is a suggestive one.
And it is
That Miss Flora Millar, the lady who had caused the disturbance, has actually been arrested. It appears that she was formerly a danseuse at the Allegro, and that she has known the bridegroom for some years. There are no further particulars, and the whole case is in your hands nowso far as it has been set forth in the public press.
And an exceedingly interesting case it appears to be. I would not have missed it for worlds. But there is a ring at the bell, Watson, and as the clock makes it a few minutes after four, I have no doubt that this will prove to be our noble client. Do not dream of going, Watson, for I very much prefer having a witness, if only as a check to my own memory.
Lord Robert St. Simon, announced our page- boy, throwing open the door. A gentleman entered, with a pleasant, cultured face, high-nosed and pale, with something perhaps of petulance about the mouth, and with the steady, well-opened eye of a man whose pleasant lot it had ever been to com- mand and to be obeyed. His manner was brisk, and yet his general appearance gave an undue impres- sion of age, for he had a slight forward stoop and a little bend of the knees as he walked. His hair, too, as he swept off his very curly-brimmed hat, was grizzled round the edges and thin upon the top.   As to his dress, it was careful to the verge of fop- pishness, with high collar, black frock-coat, white waistcoat, yellow gloves, patent-leather shoes, and light-coloured gaiters. He advanced slowly  into the room, turning his head from left to right, and swinging in his right hand the cord which held his golden eyeglasses.
Good-day, Lord St. Simon, said Holmes, ris- ing and bowing. Pray take the basket-chair. This is my friend and colleague, Dr. Watson. Draw up a little to the fire, and we will talk this matter over.
A most painful matter to me, as you can most readily imagine, Mr. Holmes. I have  been cut to  the quick. I understand that you have already man- aged several delicate cases of this sort, sir, though I presume that they were hardly from the same class of society.
No, I am descending. I beg pardon.
My last client of the sort was a king.
Oh, really! I had no idea. And which king? The King of Scandinavia.



What! Had he lost his wife?
You can understand, said Holmes suavely, that I extend to the affairs of my other clients the same secrecy which I promise to you in yours.
Of course!  Very  right!   very right!   Im sure   I beg pardon. As to my own case, I am ready to give you any information which may assist you in forming an opinion.
Thank you. I have already learned all that is  in the public prints, nothing more. I presume that I may take it as correctthis article, for example, as to the disappearance of the bride.
Lord St. Simon glanced over it. Yes, it is correct, as far as it goes.
But it needs a great deal of supplementing be- fore anyone could offer an opinion. I think that I may arrive at my facts most directly by questioning you.
Pray do so.
When did you first meet Miss Hatty Doran? In San Francisco, a year ago.
You were travelling in the States? Yes.
Did you become engaged then? No.
But you were on a friendly footing?
I was amused by her society, and she could see that I was amused.
Her father is very rich?
He is said to be the richest man on the Pacific slope.
And how did he make his money?
In mining. He had nothing a few years ago. Then he struck gold, invested it, and came up by leaps and bounds.
Now, what is your own impression as to the young ladysyour wifes character?
The nobleman swung his glasses a little faster and stared down into the fire. You see, Mr. Holmes, said he, my wife was twenty before her father became a rich man. During that time she ran free in a mining camp and wandered through woods or mountains, so that her education has come from Nature rather than from the schoolmas- ter. She is what we call in England a tomboy, with a strong nature, wild and free, unfettered by any sort of traditions. She is impetuousvolcanic, I was about to say. She is swift in making up her mind and fearless in carrying out her resolutions. On the other hand, I would not have given her the
name which I have  the honour to bearhe gave   a little stately coughhad not I thought her to   be at bottom a noble woman. I believe that she is capable of heroic self-sacrifice and that anything dishonourable would be repugnant to her.
Have you her photograph?
I brought this with me. He opened a locket and showed us the full face of a very lovely woman. It was not a photograph but an ivory miniature, and the artist had brought out the full effect of the lustrous black hair, the large dark eyes, and the exquisite mouth. Holmes gazed long and earnestly at it. Then he closed the locket and handed it back to Lord St. Simon.
The young lady came to London, then, and you renewed your acquaintance?
Yes, her father brought her over for this last London season. I met her several times, became engaged to her, and have now married her.
She brought, I understand, a considerable dowry?
A fair dowry. Not more than is usual in my family.
And this, of course, remains to you, since the marriage is a fait accompli?
I really have made no inquiries on the subject. Very naturally not. Did you see Miss Doran on
the day before the wedding?
Yes.
Was she in good spirits?
Never better. She kept talking of what we should do in our future lives.
Indeed! That is very interesting. And on the morning of the wedding?
She was as bright as possibleat least until after the ceremony.
And did you observe any change in her then?
Well, to tell the truth, I saw then the first signs that I had ever seen that her temper was just a lit- tle sharp. The incident however, was too trivial to relate and can have no possible bearing upon the case.
Pray let us have it, for all that.
Oh,  it is childish.  She dropped her bouquet  as we went towards the  vestry.  She  was  passing the front pew at the time, and it fell over into the pew. There was a moments delay, but the gentle- man in the pew handed it up to her again,  and      it did not appear to be the worse for the fall. Yet when I spoke to her of the matter, she answered me abruptly; and in the carriage, on our way home, she seemed absurdly agitated over this trifling cause.



Indeed! You say that there was a gentleman in the pew. Some of the general public were present, then?
Oh, yes. It is impossible to exclude them when the church is open.
This gentleman was not one of your wifes friends?
No, no; I call him a gentleman by courtesy, but he was quite a common-looking person. I hardly noticed his appearance. But really I think that we are wandering rather far from the point.
Lady St. Simon, then, returned from the wed- ding in a less cheerful frame of mind than she had gone to it. What did she do on re-entering her fathers house?
I saw her in conversation with her maid. And who is her maid?
Alice is her name. She is an American and came from California with her.
A confidential servant?
A little too much so. It seemed to me that her mistress allowed her to take great liberties. Still, of course, in America they look upon these things in a different way.
How long did she speak to this Alice?
Oh, a few minutes. I had something else to think of.
You did not overhear what they said?
Lady St. Simon said something about jumping a claim. She was accustomed to use slang of the kind. I have no idea what she meant.
American slang is very expressive sometimes. And what did your wife do when she finished speaking to her maid?
She walked into the breakfast-room. On your arm?
No, alone. She was  very independent in lit-  tle matters like that. Then, after we had sat down for ten minutes or so, she rose hurriedly, muttered some words of apology, and left the room. She never came back.
But this maid, Alice, as I understand, deposes that she went to her room, covered her brides dress with a long ulster, put on a bonnet, and went out.
Quite so. And she was afterwards seen walk- ing into Hyde Park in company with Flora Millar,  a woman who is now in custody, and who had already made a disturbance at Mr. Dorans house that morning.
Ah, yes. I should like a few particulars as to this young lady, and your relations to her.
Lord St. Simon shrugged his shoulders and raised his eyebrows. We have been on a friendly footing for some yearsI may say on a very friendly footing.   She used to be at the Allegro.   I have not treated her ungenerously, and she had no just cause of complaint against me, but you know what women are, Mr. Holmes. Flora was a dear little thing, but exceedingly hot-headed and devotedly attached to me. She wrote me dreadful letters when she heard that I was about to be mar- ried, and, to tell the truth, the reason why I had the marriage celebrated so quietly was that I feared lest there might be a scandal in the church. She came to Mr. Dorans door just after we returned, and she endeavoured to push her way in, uttering very abusive expressions towards my wife, and even threatening her, but I had foreseen the possibility of something of the sort, and I had two police fel- lows there in private clothes, who soon pushed her out again. She was quiet when she saw that there was no good in making a row.
Did your wife hear all this?
No, thank goodness, she did not.
And she was seen walking with this very woman afterwards?
Yes. That is what Mr. Lestrade, of Scotland Yard, looks upon as so serious. It is thought that Flora decoyed my wife out and laid some terrible trap for her.
Well, it is a possible supposition. You think so, too?
I did not say a probable one. But you do not yourself look upon this as likely?
I do not think Flora would hurt a fly.
Still, jealousy is a strange transformer of char- acters. Pray what is your own theory as to what took place?
Well, really, I came to seek a theory, not to propound one. I have given you all the facts. Since you ask me, however, I may say that it has occurred to me as possible that the excitement of this affair, the consciousness that she had made so immense  a social stride, had the effect of causing some little nervous disturbance in my wife.
In short, that she had become suddenly de- ranged?
Well, really, when I consider that she has turned her backI will not say upon me, but upon so much that many have aspired to without suc- cessI can hardly explain it in any other fashion. Well, certainly that is also a conceivable hy- pothesis, said Holmes, smiling. And now, Lord



St. Simon, I think that I have nearly all my data. May I ask whether you were seated at the breakfast- table so that you could see out of the window?
We could see the other side of the road and the Park.
Quite so. Then I do not think that I need to detain you longer. I shall communicate with you.
Should you be fortunate enough to solve this problem, said our client, rising.
I have solved it. Eh? What was that?
I say that I have solved it. Where, then, is my wife?
That is a detail which I shall speedily supply.
Lord St. Simon shook his head. I am afraid that it will take wiser heads than yours or mine, he remarked, and bowing in a stately, old-fashioned manner he departed.
It is very good of Lord St. Simon to honour my head by putting it on a level with his own, said Sherlock Holmes, laughing. I think that I shall have a whisky and soda and a cigar after all this cross-questioning. I had formed my conclusions as to the case before our client came into the room.
My dear Holmes!
I have notes of several similar cases, though none, as I remarked before, which were quite as prompt. My whole examination served to turn my conjecture into a certainty. Circumstantial evidence is occasionally very convincing, as when you  find  a trout in the milk, to quote Thoreaus example.
But I have heard all that you have heard. Without, however, the knowledge of pre-
existing cases which serves me so well. There was  a parallel instance in Aberdeen some years back, and something on very much the same lines at Mu- nich the year after the Franco-Prussian War. It is one of these casesbut, hullo, here is Lestrade! Good-afternoon, Lestrade! You will find an extra tumbler upon the sideboard, and there are cigars in the box.
The official detective was attired in a pea-jacket and cravat, which gave him a decidedly nautical appearance, and he carried a black canvas bag in his hand. With a short greeting he seated himself and lit the cigar which had been offered to him.
Whats up, then? asked Holmes with a twin- kle in his eye. You look dissatisfied.
And I feel dissatisfied. It is this infernal St. Simon marriage case. I can make neither head nor tail of the business.
Really! You surprise me.
Who ever heard of such a mixed affair? Every clue seems to slip through my fingers. I have been at work upon it all day.
And very wet it seems to  have  made  you, said Holmes laying his hand upon the arm of the pea-jacket.
Yes, I have been dragging the Serpentine. In heavens name, what for?
In search of the body of Lady St. Simon.
Sherlock Holmes leaned back in his chair and laughed heartily.
Have you dragged the basin of Trafalgar Square fountain? he asked.
Why? What do you mean?
Because you have just as good a chance of find- ing this lady in the one as in the other.
Lestrade shot an angry glance at my companion. I suppose you know all about it, he snarled.
Well, I have only just heard the facts, but my mind is made up.
Oh, indeed! Then you think that the Serpen- tine plays no part in the matter?
I think it very unlikely.
Then perhaps you will kindly explain how it is that we found this in it? He opened his bag as he spoke, and tumbled onto the floor a wedding-dress of watered silk, a pair of white satin shoes and a brides wreath and veil, all discoloured and soaked in water. There, said he, putting a new wedding- ring upon the top of the pile. There is a little nut for you to crack, Master Holmes.
Oh, indeed! said my friend, blowing blue rings into the air. You dragged them from the Serpentine?
No. They were found floating near the margin by a park-keeper. They have been identified as her clothes, and it seemed to me that if the clothes were there the body would not be far off.
By the same brilliant reasoning, every mans body is to be found in the neighbourhood of his wardrobe. And pray what did you hope to arrive at through this?
At some evidence implicating Flora Millar in the disappearance.
I am afraid that you will find  it  difficult. Are  you,  indeed,  now?  cried  Lestrade  with
some bitterness. I am afraid, Holmes, that you are not very practical with your deductions and your inferences.  You have made two blunders in



as many minutes. This dress does implicate Miss Flora Millar.
And how?
In the dress is a pocket. In the pocket is a card-case. In the card-case is a note. And here is the very note. He slapped it down upon the table in front of him. Listen to this:
 You will see me when all is ready. Come at once.
  F.H.M.

Now my theory all along has been that Lady St. Simon was decoyed away by Flora Millar, and that she, with confederates, no doubt, was responsible for her disappearance. Here, signed with her ini- tials, is the very note which was no doubt quietly slipped into her hand at the door and which lured her within their reach.
Very good, Lestrade, said Holmes, laughing. You really are very fine indeed. Let me see it. He took up the paper in a listless way, but his attention instantly became riveted, and he gave a little cry of satisfaction. This is indeed important, said he.
Ha! you find it so?
Extremely so. I congratulate you warmly.
Lestrade rose in his triumph and bent his head to look. Why, he shrieked, youre looking at the wrong side!
On the contrary, this is the right side.
The right side? Youre mad! Here is the note written in pencil over here.
And over here is what appears to be the frag- ment of a hotel bill, which interests me deeply.
Theres nothing in it. I looked at it before, said Lestrade.
 Oct. 4th, rooms 8s., breakfast 2s. 6d., cocktail 1s., lunch 2s. 6d., glass sherry, 8d. I see nothing in that.
Very likely not. It is most important, all the same. As to the note, it is important also, or at least the initials are, so I congratulate you again.
Ive wasted time enough, said Lestrade, rising. I believe in hard work and not in sitting by the fire spinning fine theories. Good-day, Mr. Holmes, and we shall see which gets to the bottom of the matter first. He gathered up the garments, thrust them into the bag, and made for the door.
Just one hint to you, Lestrade, drawled Holmes before his rival vanished; I will tell you the true solution of the matter. Lady St. Simon is a
myth. There is not, and there never has been, any such person.
Lestrade looked sadly at my companion. Then he turned to me, tapped his forehead three times, shook his head solemnly, and hurried away.
He had hardly shut the door behind him when Holmes rose to put on his overcoat. There is some- thing in what the fellow says about outdoor work, he remarked, so I think, Watson, that I must leave you to your papers for a little.
It was after five oclock when Sherlock Holmes left me, but I had no time to be lonely, for within  an hour there arrived a confectioners man with a very large flat box. This he unpacked with the help of a youth whom he had brought with him, and presently, to my very great astonishment, a quite epicurean little cold supper began to be laid out upon our humble lodging-house mahogany. There were a couple of brace of cold woodcock, a pheas- ant, a pate de foie gras pie with a group of ancient and cobwebby bottles. Having laid out all these luxuries, my two visitors vanished away, like the genii of the Arabian Nights, with no explanation save that the things had been paid for and were ordered to this address.
Just before nine oclock Sherlock Holmes stepped briskly into the room. His features were gravely set, but there was a light in his eye which made me think that he had not been disappointed in his conclusions.
They have laid the supper, then, he said, rub- bing his hands.
You seem to expect company. They have laid for five.
Yes, I fancy we may have some company drop- ping in, said he. I am surprised that Lord St. Simon has not already arrived. Ha! I fancy that I hear his step now upon the stairs.
It was indeed our visitor of the afternoon who came bustling in, dangling his glasses more vigor- ously than ever, and with a very perturbed expres- sion upon his aristocratic features.
My messenger reached you, then? asked Holmes.
Yes, and I confess that the contents startled me beyond measure. Have you good authority for what you say?
The  best possible.
Lord St. Simon sank into a chair and passed his hand over his forehead.
What will the Duke say, he murmured, when he hears that one of the family has been subjected to such humiliation?



It is the purest accident. I cannot allow that there is any humiliation.
Ah, you look on these things from another standpoint.
I fail to see that anyone is to blame. I can hardly see how the lady could have acted other- wise, though her abrupt method of doing it was undoubtedly to be regretted. Having no mother, she had no one to advise her at such a crisis.
It was a slight, sir, a public slight, said Lord St. Simon, tapping his fingers upon the table.
You must make allowance for this poor girl, placed in so unprecedented a position.
I will make no allowance. I am very angry indeed, and I have been shamefully used.
I think that I heard a ring, said Holmes. Yes, there are steps on the landing. If I cannot persuade you to take a lenient view of the matter, Lord St. Si- mon, I have brought an advocate here who may be more successful. He opened the door and ushered in a lady and gentleman. Lord St. Simon, said he allow me to introduce you to Mr. and Mrs. Francis Hay Moulton. The lady, I think, you have already met.
At the sight of these newcomers our client had sprung from his seat and stood very erect, with his eyes cast down and his hand thrust into the breast of his frock-coat, a picture of offended dignity. The lady had taken a quick step forward and had held out her hand to him, but he still refused to raise his eyes. It was as well for his resolution, perhaps, for her pleading face was one which it was hard to resist.
Youre angry, Robert, said she. Well, I guess you have every cause to be.
Pray make no apology to me, said Lord St.
Simon bitterly.
Oh, yes, I know that I have treated you real bad and that I should have spoken to you before I went; but I was kind of rattled, and from the time when I saw Frank here again I just didnt know what I was doing or saying. I only wonder I didnt fall down and do a faint right there before the altar.
Perhaps, Mrs. Moulton, you would like my friend and me to leave the room while you explain this matter?
If I may give an opinion, remarked the strange gentleman, weve had just a little too much secrecy over this business already. For my part, I should like all Europe and America to hear the rights of it. He was a small, wiry, sunburnt man, clean-shaven, with a sharp face and alert manner.
Then Ill tell our story right away, said the lady. Frank here and I met in 84, in McQuires camp, near the Rockies, where pa was working a claim. We were  engaged to each other, Frank and I; but then one day father struck a rich pocket and made a pile, while poor Frank here had a claim that petered out and came to nothing. The richer pa grew the poorer was Frank; so at last pa wouldnt hear of our engagement lasting any longer, and he took me away to Frisco. Frank wouldnt throw up his hand, though; so he followed me there, and he saw me without pa knowing anything about it. It would only have made him mad to know,  so  we just fixed it all up for ourselves. Frank said that he would go and make his pile, too, and never come back to claim me until he had as much as pa. So then I promised to wait for him to the end of time and pledged myself not to marry anyone else while he lived. Why shouldnt we be married right away, then, said he, and then I will feel sure of you; and I wont claim to be your husband until I come back? Well, we talked it over, and he had fixed it all up so nicely, with a clergyman all ready in waiting, that we just did it right there; and then Frank went off to seek his fortune, and I went back to pa.
The next I heard of Frank was that he was in Montana, and then he went prospecting in Arizona, and then I heard of him from New Mexico. After that came a long newspaper story about how a min- ers camp had been attacked by Apache Indians, and there was my Franks name among the killed.  I fainted dead away, and I was very sick for months after. Pa thought I had a decline and took me to half the doctors in Frisco. Not a word  of news came  for a year and more, so that I never doubted that Frank was really dead. Then Lord St. Simon came to Frisco, and we came to London, and a marriage was arranged, and pa was very pleased, but I felt  all the time that no man on this earth would ever take the place in my heart that had been given to my poor Frank.
Still, if I had married Lord St. Simon, of course Id have done my duty by him. We cant command our love, but we can our actions. I went to the altar with him with the intention to make him just as good a wife as it was in me to be. But you may imagine what I felt when, just as I came to the altar rails, I glanced back and saw Frank standing and looking at me out of the first pew. I thought it was his ghost at first; but when I looked again there he was still, with a kind of question in his eyes,  as if  to ask me whether I were glad or sorry to see him.  I wonder I didnt drop. I know that everything was turning round, and the words of the clergyman were just like the buzz of a bee in my ear. I didnt



know what to do. Should I stop the service and make a scene in the church? I glanced at him again, and he seemed to know what I was  thinking, for  he raised his finger to his lips to tell me to be still. Then I saw him scribble on a piece of paper, and I knew that he was writing me a note. As I passed  his pew on the way out I dropped  my  bouquet over to him, and he slipped the note into my hand when he returned me the flowers. It was only a  line asking me to join him when he made the sign to me to do so. Of course I never doubted for a moment that my first duty was now to him, and I determined to do just whatever he might direct.
When I got back I told my maid, who had known him in California, and had always been his friend. I ordered her to say nothing, but to get a few things packed and my ulster ready. I know I ought to have spoken to Lord St. Simon, but it was dreadful hard before his mother and all those great people. I just made up my mind to run away and explain afterwards. I hadnt been at the table ten minutes before I saw Frank out of the window at the other side of the road. He beckoned to me and then began walking into the Park. I slipped out, put on my things, and followed him. Some woman came talking something or other about Lord St. Si- mon to meseemed to me from the little I heard as if he had a little secret of his own before marriage alsobut I managed to get away from her and soon overtook Frank. We got into a cab together, and away we drove to some lodgings he had taken in Gordon Square, and that was my true wedding after all those years of waiting. Frank had been a prisoner among the Apaches, had escaped, came on to Frisco, found that I had given him up for dead and had gone to England, followed me there, and had come upon me at last on the very morning of my second wedding.
I saw it in a paper, explained the American. It gave the name and the church but not where the lady lived.
Then we had a  talk  as  to  what  we  should  do, and Frank was all for openness, but I was so ashamed of it all that I felt as if I should like to vanish away and never see any of them againjust sending a line to pa, perhaps, to show him that I was alive. It was awful to me to think of all those lords and ladies sitting round that breakfast-table and waiting for me to come back. So Frank took my wedding-clothes and things and made a bundle of them, so that I should not be traced, and dropped them away somewhere where no one could find them. It is likely that we should have gone on to Paris to-morrow, only that this good gentleman, Mr.
Holmes, came round to us this evening, though how he found us is more than I can think, and he showed us very clearly and kindly that I was wrong and that Frank was right, and that we should be putting ourselves in the wrong if we were so secret. Then he offered to give us a chance of talking to Lord St. Simon alone, and so we came right away round to his rooms at once. Now, Robert, you have heard it all, and I am very sorry if I have given you pain, and I hope that you do not think very meanly of me.
Lord St. Simon had by no means relaxed his rigid attitude, but had listened with a frowning brow and a compressed lip to this long narrative.
Excuse me, he said, but it is not my custom to discuss my most intimate personal affairs in this public manner.
Then you wont forgive me? You wont shake hands before I go?
Oh, certainly, if it would give you any plea- sure. He put out his hand and coldly grasped that which she extended to him.
I had hoped, suggested Holmes, that you would have joined us in a friendly supper.
I think that there you ask a little too much, responded his Lordship. I may be forced to acqui- esce in these recent developments, but I can hardly be expected to make merry over them. I think that with your permission I will now wish you all a very good-night. He included us all in a sweeping bow and stalked out of the room.
Then I trust that you at least will honour me with your company, said Sherlock Holmes. It is always a joy to meet an American, Mr. Moulton, for I am one of those who believe that the folly of a monarch and the blundering of a minister in far-gone years will not prevent our children from being some day citizens of the same world-wide country under a flag which shall be a quartering of the Union Jack with the Stars and Stripes.
The case has been an interesting one, re- marked Holmes when our visitors had left us, be- cause it serves to show very clearly how simple the explanation may be of an affair which at first sight seems to be almost inexplicable. Nothing could be more natural than the sequence of events as nar- rated by this lady, and nothing stranger than the result when viewed, for instance, by Mr. Lestrade of Scotland Yard.
You were not yourself at fault at all, then? From  the  first,  two  facts  were  very  obvious
to me, the one that the lady had been quite will-
ing to undergo the wedding ceremony, the other that she had repented of it within a few minutes



of returning home. Obviously something had oc- curred during the morning, then, to cause her to change her mind. What could that something be? She could not have spoken to anyone when  she was out, for she had been in the company of the bridegroom. Had she seen someone, then? If she had, it must be someone from America because she had spent so short a time in this country that she could hardly have allowed  anyone  to acquire so deep an influence over her that the mere sight  of him would induce her to change her plans so completely. You see we have already arrived, by a process of exclusion, at the idea that she might have seen an American. Then who could this American be, and why should he possess so much influence over her? It might be a lover; it might be a hus- band. Her young womanhood had, I knew, been spent in rough scenes and under strange condi- tions.  So far I had got before I ever  heard Lord   St. Simons narrative.  When he told us of a man  in a pew,  of the change in the brides manner,  of  so transparent a device for obtaining a note as the dropping of a bouquet, of her resort to her confi- dential maid, and of her very significant allusion to claim-jumpingwhich in miners parlance means taking possession of that which another person has a prior claim tothe whole situation became ab- solutely clear. She had gone off with a man, and  the man was either a lover or was a previous hus- bandthe chances being in favour of the latter.
And how in the world did  you  find  them? It might have been difficult, but friend Lestrade
held information in his hands the value of which he
did not himself know. The initials were, of course, of the highest importance, but more valuable still
was it to know that within a week he had settled his bill at one of the most select London hotels.
How did you deduce the select?
By the select prices. Eight shillings for a bed and eightpence for a glass of sherry pointed to one of the most expensive hotels. There are not many in London which charge at that rate. In the second one which  I  visited  in  Northumberland  Avenue, I learned by an inspection of the book that Fran- cis H. Moulton, an American gentleman, had left only the day before, and on looking over the entries against him, I came upon the very items which I had seen in the duplicate bill. His letters were to  be forwarded to 226 Gordon Square; so thither I travelled, and being fortunate enough to find the loving couple at home, I ventured to give them some paternal advice and to point out to them that it would be better in every way that they should make their position a little clearer both to the gen- eral public and to Lord St. Simon in particular. I invited them to meet him here, and, as you see, I made him keep the appointment.
But with no very good result, I remarked. His conduct was certainly not very gracious.
Ah, Watson, said Holmes, smiling, perhaps you would not be very gracious either, if, after all the trouble of wooing and wedding, you found yourself deprived in an instant of wife and of for- tune. I think that we may judge Lord St. Simon very mercifully and thank our stars that we are never likely to find ourselves in the same position. Draw your chair up and hand me my violin, for the only problem we have still to solve is how to while away these bleak autumnal evenings.



























The Adventure of the Beryl Coronet





H
olmes, said I as  I  stood  one  morning in our bow-window looking down the street, here is a madman coming along.
It seems rather sad that his relatives should allow him to come out alone.
My friend rose lazily from his armchair and stood with his hands in the pockets of his dressing- gown, looking over my shoulder. It was a bright, crisp February morning, and the snow of the day before still lay deep upon the ground, shimmering brightly in the wintry sun. Down the centre of Baker Street it had been ploughed into a brown crumbly band by the traffic, but at either side and on the heaped-up edges of the foot-paths it still   lay as white as when it fell.  The grey pavement  had been cleaned and scraped, but was still dan- gerously slippery, so that there were fewer pas- sengers than usual. Indeed, from the direction of the Metropolitan Station no one was coming save the single gentleman whose eccentric conduct had drawn my attention.
He was a man of about fifty, tall, portly, and im- posing, with a massive, strongly marked face and a commanding figure. He was dressed in a sombre yet rich style, in black frock-coat, shining hat, neat brown gaiters, and well-cut pearl-grey trousers. Yet his actions were in absurd contrast to the dignity  of his dress and features, for he was running hard, with occasional little springs, such as a weary man gives who is little accustomed to set any tax upon his legs. As he ran he jerked his hands up and down, waggled his head, and writhed his face into the most extraordinary contortions.
What on earth can be the matter with him?    I asked. He is looking up at the numbers of the houses.
I believe that he is coming here, said Holmes, rubbing his hands.
Here?
Yes; I rather think he is coming to consult me professionally. I think that I recognise the symp- toms. Ha! did I not tell you? As he spoke, the man, puffing and blowing, rushed at our door and pulled at our bell until the whole house resounded with the clanging.
A few moments later he was in our room, still puffing, still gesticulating, but with so fixed a look of grief and despair in his eyes that our  smiles were turned in an instant to horror and pity. For a while he could not get his words out, but swayed his body and plucked at his hair like one who has been driven to the extreme limits of his reason. Then, suddenly springing to his feet, he beat his
head against the wall with such force that we both rushed upon him and tore him away to the centre of the room. Sherlock Holmes pushed him down into the easy-chair and, sitting beside him, patted his hand and chatted with him in the easy, soothing tones which he knew so well how to employ.
You have come to me to tell your story, have you not? said he. You are fatigued with your haste. Pray wait until you have recovered yourself, and then I shall be most happy to look into any little problem which you may submit to me.
The man sat for a minute or more with a heav- ing chest, fighting against his emotion. Then he passed his handkerchief over his brow, set his lips tight, and turned his face towards us.
No doubt you think me mad? said he.
I see that you have had some great trouble, responded Holmes.
God knows I have!a trouble which is enough to unseat my reason, so sudden and so terrible is it. Public disgrace I might have faced, although I am a man whose character has never yet borne a stain. Private affliction also is the lot of every man; but the two  coming together,  and in so frightful    a form, have been enough to shake my very soul. Besides, it is not I alone. The very noblest in the land may suffer unless some way be found out of this horrible affair.
Pray compose yourself, sir, said Holmes, and let me have a clear account of who you are and what it is that has befallen you.
My name, answered our visitor, is probably familiar to your ears. I am Alexander Holder, of  the banking firm of Holder & Stevenson, of Thread- needle Street.
The name was indeed well known to us as be- longing to the senior partner in the second largest private banking concern in the City of London. What could have happened, then, to bring one of the foremost citizens of London to this most pitiable pass? We waited, all curiosity, until with another effort he braced himself to tell his story.
I feel that time is of value, said he; that is why I hastened here when the police inspector sug- gested that I should secure your co-operation. I came to Baker Street by the Underground and hur- ried from there on foot, for the cabs go slowly through this snow. That is why I was so out of breath, for I am a man who takes very little exer- cise. I feel better now, and I will put the facts before you as shortly and yet as clearly as I can.
It is, of course, well known to you that in a suc- cessful banking business as much depends upon our being able to find remunerative investments for



our funds as upon our increasing our connection and the number of our depositors. One of our most lucrative means of laying out money is in the shape of loans, where the security is unimpeachable. We have done a good deal in this direction during the last few years, and there are many noble families to whom we have advanced large sums upon the security of their pictures, libraries, or plate.
Yesterday morning I was  seated in my office  at the bank when a card was brought in to me by one of the clerks. I started when I saw the name, for it was that of none other thanwell, perhaps even to you I had better say no more than that it was a name which is a household  word  all  over the earthone of the highest, noblest, most exalted names in England. I was overwhelmed by the hon- our and attempted, when he entered, to  say  so, but he plunged at once into business with the air  of a man who wishes to hurry quickly through a disagreeable task.
 Mr. Holder, said he, I have been informed that you are in the habit of advancing money.
 The firm does so when the security is good.   I answered.
 It is absolutely essential to me, said he, that I should have 50,000 at once. I could, of course, borrow so trifling a sum ten times over from my friends, but I much prefer to make it a matter of business and to carry out that business myself. In my position you can readily understand that it is unwise to place ones self under obligations.
 For how long, may I ask, do you want this sum? I asked.
 Next Monday I have a large sum due to me, and I shall then most certainly repay what you ad- vance, with whatever interest you think it right to charge. But it is very essential to me that the money should be paid at once.
 I should be happy to advance it without fur- ther parley from my own private purse, said I, were it not that the strain would be rather more than it could bear. If, on the other hand,  I am to  do it in the name of the firm, then in justice to my partner I must insist that, even in your case, every businesslike precaution should be taken.
 I should much prefer to have it so, said he, raising up a square, black morocco case which he had laid beside his chair. You have doubtless heard of the Beryl Coronet?
 One of the most precious public possessions of the empire, said I.
 Precisely. He opened the case, and there, imbedded in soft, flesh-coloured velvet, lay the
magnificent piece of jewellery which he had named. There are thirty-nine enormous beryls, said he, and the price of the gold chasing is incalculable. The lowest estimate would put the worth of the coronet at double the sum which I have asked. I  am prepared to leave it with you as my security.
I took the precious case into my hands and looked in some perplexity from it to my illustrious client.
 You doubt its value? he asked.  Not at all. I only doubt
 The propriety of my leaving it. You may set your mind at rest about that. I should not dream of doing so were it not absolutely certain that I should be able in four days to reclaim it. It is a pure matter of form. Is the security sufficient?
 Ample.
 You understand, Mr. Holder, that I am giving you a strong proof of the confidence which I have in you, founded upon all that I have  heard of you.  I rely upon you not only to be discreet and to re- frain from all gossip upon the matter but, above  all, to preserve this coronet with every possible pre- caution because I need not say that a great public scandal would be caused if any harm were to be- fall it. Any injury to it would be almost as serious as its complete loss, for there are no beryls in the world to match these, and it would be impossible to replace them. I leave it with you, however, with every confidence, and I shall call for it in person on Monday morning.
Seeing that my client was anxious to leave, I said no more but, calling for my cashier, I ordered him to pay over fifty 1000 notes. When I was alone once more, however, with the precious case lying upon the table in front of me, I could not but think with some misgivings of the immense responsibil- ity which it entailed upon me. There could be no doubt that, as it was a national possession, a horri- ble scandal would ensue if any misfortune should occur to it. I already regretted having ever con- sented to take charge of it. However,  it  was  too late to alter the matter now, so I locked it up in my private safe and turned once more to my work.
When evening came I felt that it would be an imprudence to leave so precious a thing in the office behind me. Bankers safes had been forced before now, and why should not mine be? If so, how ter- rible would be the position in which I should find myself! I determined, therefore, that for the next few days I would always carry the case backward and forward with me, so that it might never be really out of my reach. With this intention, I called



a cab and drove out to my house at Streatham, car- rying the jewel with me. I did not breathe freely until I had taken it upstairs and locked it in the bureau of my dressing-room.
And now a word as to my household, Mr. Holmes, for I wish you to thoroughly understand the situation. My  groom and  my  page  sleep out of the house, and may be set aside altogether. I have three maid-servants who have  been with me  a number of years and whose absolute reliability   is quite above suspicion. Another, Lucy Parr, the second waiting-maid, has only been in my service a few months. She came with an excellent character, however, and has always given me satisfaction. She is a very pretty girl and has attracted admirers who have occasionally hung about the place. That is the only drawback which we have found to her, but we believe her to be a thoroughly good girl in every way.
So much for the servants. My family itself is  so small that it will not take me long to describe it. I am a widower and have an only son, Arthur. He has been a disappointment to me, Mr. Holmesa grievous disappointment. I have no doubt that I am myself to blame. People tell me that I have spoiled him. Very likely I have. When my dear wife died I felt that he was all I had to love. I could not bear to see the smile fade even for a moment from his face. I have never denied him a wish. Perhaps it would have been better for both of us had I been sterner, but I meant it for the best.
It was naturally my intention that he should succeed me in my business, but he was not of a business turn. He was wild, wayward, and,  to speak the truth, I could not trust him in the han- dling of large sums of money. When he was young he became a member of an aristocratic club, and there, having charming manners, he was soon the intimate of a number of men with long purses and expensive habits. He learned to play heavily at cards and to squander money on the turf, until he had again and again to come to me and implore me to give him an advance upon his allowance, that he might settle his debts of honour. He tried more than once to break away from the dangerous company which he was keeping, but each time the influence of his friend, Sir George Burnwell, was enough to draw him back again.
And, indeed,  I  could  not  wonder  that  such a man as Sir George Burnwell should gain an in- fluence over him, for he has frequently brought him to my house, and I have found myself that I could hardly resist the fascination of his manner. He is older than Arthur, a man of the world to his
finger-tips, one who had been everywhere, seen everything, a brilliant talker, and a man of great personal beauty. Yet when I think of him in cold blood, far away from the glamour of his presence, I am convinced from his cynical speech and the look which I have caught in his eyes that he is one who should be deeply distrusted. So I think, and so, too, thinks my little Mary, who has a womans quick insight into character.
And now there is only she to be described. She is my niece; but when my brother died five years ago and left her alone in the world I adopted her, and have looked upon her ever since as my daugh- ter. She is a sunbeam in my housesweet, loving, beautiful, a wonderful manager and housekeeper, yet as tender and quiet and gentle as a woman could be. She is my right hand. I do not know  what I could do without her. In only one matter  has she ever gone against my wishes. Twice  my  boy has asked her to marry him, for he loves her devotedly, but each time she has refused him. I think that if anyone could have drawn  him  into the right path it would have been she, and that his marriage might have changed his whole life; but now, alas! it is too lateforever too late!
Now, Mr. Holmes, you know the people who live under my roof, and I shall continue with my miserable story.
When we were taking coffee in the drawing- room that night after dinner, I told Arthur and Mary my experience, and of the precious treasure which we had under our roof, suppressing only the name of my client.  Lucy Parr,  who had brought   in the coffee, had, I am sure, left the room; but I cannot swear that the door was closed. Mary and Arthur were much interested and wished to  see the famous coronet, but I thought it better not to disturb it.
 Where have you put it?  asked Arthur.  In my own bureau.
 Well, I hope to goodness the house wont be burgled during the night. said he.
 It is locked up, I answered.
 Oh, any old key will fit that bureau. When I was a youngster I have opened it myself with the key of the box-room cupboard.
He often had a wild way of talking, so that I thought little of what he said. He followed me to my room, however, that night with a very grave face.
 Look here, dad, said he with his eyes cast down, can you let me have 200?
 No, I cannot! I answered sharply. I have been far too generous with you in money matters.



 You have been very kind, said he, but I must have this money, or else I can never show my face inside the club again.
 And a very good thing, too! I cried.
 Yes, but you would not have me leave it a dishonoured man, said he. I could not bear the disgrace. I must raise the money in some way, and if you will not let me have it, then I must try other means.
I was very angry, for this was the third demand during the month. You shall not have a farthing from me, I cried, on which he bowed and left the room without another word.
When he was gone I unlocked my bureau, made sure that my treasure was safe, and locked it again. Then I started to go round the house to see that all was securea duty which I usually leave to Mary but which I thought it well to perform myself that night. As I came down the stairs I saw Mary herself at the side window of the hall, which she closed and fastened as I approached.
 Tell me, dad, said she, looking, I thought, a little disturbed, did you give Lucy, the maid, leave to go out to-night?
 Certainly not.
 She came in just now by the back door. I have no doubt that she has only been to the side gate to see someone, but I think that it is hardly safe and should be stopped.
 You must speak to her in the morning, or I will if you prefer it. Are you sure that everything is fastened?
 Quite sure, dad.
 Then, good-night. I kissed her and went up to my bedroom again, where I was soon asleep.
I am endeavouring to tell you everything, Mr. Holmes, which may have any bearing upon the case, but I beg that you will question me upon any point which I do not make clear.
On the contrary, your statement is singularly lucid.
I come to a part of my story now in which         I should wish to be particularly so.  I am not a   very heavy sleeper, and the anxiety in my mind tended, no doubt, to make me even less so than usual. About two in the morning, then, I was awak- ened by some sound in the house. It had ceased  ere I was wide awake, but it had left an impression behind it as though a window had gently closed somewhere. I lay listening with all my ears. Sud- denly, to my horror, there was a distinct sound of footsteps moving softly in the next room. I slipped
out of bed, all palpitating with fear, and peeped round the corner of my dressing-room door.
 Arthur! I screamed, you villain! you thief!
How dare you touch that coronet?
The gas was half up, as I had left it, and my unhappy boy, dressed only in his shirt and trousers, was standing beside the light, holding the coronet in his hands.  He appeared to be wrenching at it,  or bending it with all his strength. At my cry he dropped it from his grasp and turned as pale as death. I snatched it up and examined it.  One of  the gold corners, with three of the beryls in it, was missing.
 You blackguard! I shouted, beside myself with rage. You have destroyed it! You have dishon- oured me forever! Where are the jewels which you have stolen?
 Stolen! he cried.
 Yes, thief! I roared, shaking him by the shoul- der.
 There are none missing. There cannot be any missing, said he.
 There are three missing. And you know where they are. Must I call you a liar as well as a thief? Did I not see you trying to tear off another piece?
 You have called me names enough, said he, I will not stand it any longer. I shall not say another word about this business, since you have chosen to insult me. I will leave your house in the morning and make my own way in the world.
 You  shall leave  it in the hands of the police!  I cried half-mad with grief and rage. I shall have this matter probed to the bottom.
 You shall learn nothing from me, said he with a passion such as I should not have thought was in his nature. If you choose to call the police, let the police find what they can.
By this time the whole house was astir, for I had raised my voice in my anger. Mary was the  first to rush into my room, and, at the sight of the coronet and of Arthurs face, she read the whole story and, with a scream, fell down senseless on the ground. I sent the house-maid for the police and put the investigation into their hands at once. When the inspector and a constable entered the house, Arthur, who had stood sullenly with his arms folded, asked me whether it was my intention to charge him with theft. I answered that it had ceased to be a private matter, but had become a public one, since the ruined coronet was national property. I was determined that the law should have its way in everything.



 At least, said he, you will not have me ar- rested at once. It would be to your advantage as well as mine if I might leave the house for five minutes.
 That you may get away, or perhaps that you may conceal what you have stolen, said I. And then, realising the dreadful position in which I was placed, I implored him to remember that not only my honour but that of one who was far greater than I was at stake; and that he threatened to raise a scandal which would convulse the nation. He might avert it all if he would but tell me what he had done with the three missing stones.
 You may as well face the matter, said I; you have been caught in the act, and no confession could make your guilt more heinous. If you but make such reparation as is in your power, by telling us where the beryls are, all shall be forgiven and forgotten.
 Keep your forgiveness for those who ask for it, he answered, turning away from me with a sneer. I saw that he was too hardened for any words of mine to influence him.  There  was  but  one  way for it. I called in the inspector and gave him into custody.  A search was  made at once not only of  his person but of his room and of every portion of the house where he could possibly have concealed the gems; but no trace of them could be found, nor would the wretched boy open his mouth for all our persuasions and our threats. This morning he was removed to a cell,  and I, after going through all  the police formalities, have  hurried round to you  to implore you to use your skill in unravelling the matter. The police have openly confessed that they can at present  make  nothing  of  it.  You  may  go to any expense which you think necessary. I have already offered a reward of 1000. My God, what shall I do! I have lost my honour, my gems,  and  my son in one night. Oh, what shall I do!
He put a hand on either side of his head and rocked himself to and fro, droning to himself like a child whose grief has got beyond words.
Sherlock Holmes sat silent for some few min- utes, with his brows knitted and his eyes fixed upon the fire.
Do you receive much company? he asked. None save my partner with his family and an
occasional friend of Arthurs. Sir George Burnwell has been several times lately.  No one else, I think.
Do you go out much in society?
Arthur does. Mary and I stay at home. We neither of us care for it.
That is unusual in a young girl.
She is of a quiet nature. Besides, she is not so very young. She is four-and-twenty.
This matter, from what you say, seems to have been a shock to her also.
Terrible! She is even more affected than I. You have neither of you any doubt as to your
sons guilt?
How can we have when I saw him with my  own eyes with the coronet in his hands.
I hardly consider that a conclusive proof. Was the remainder of the coronet at all injured?
Yes, it was twisted.
Do you not think, then, that he might have been trying to straighten it?
God bless you! You are doing what  you  can for him and for me. But it is too heavy a task.  What was he doing there at all? If his purpose were innocent, why did he not say so?
Precisely. And if it were guilty, why did he not invent a lie? His silence appears to me to cut both ways. There are several singular points about the case. What did the police think of the noise which awoke you from your sleep?
They considered that it might be caused by Arthurs closing his bedroom door.
A likely story! As if a man bent on felony would slam his door so as to wake a household. What did they say, then, of the disappearance of these gems?
They are still sounding the planking and prob- ing the furniture in the hope of finding them.
Have they thought of looking outside the house?
Yes, they have shown extraordinary energy. The whole garden has already been minutely ex- amined.
Now, my dear sir, said Holmes. is it not ob- vious to you now that this matter really strikes very much deeper than either you or the police were at first inclined to think? It appeared to you to be a simple case; to me it seems exceedingly complex. Consider what is involved by your theory. You sup- pose that your son came down from his bed, went, at great risk, to your dressing-room, opened your bureau, took out your coronet, broke off by main force a small portion of it, went off to some other place, concealed three gems out of the thirty-nine, with such skill that nobody can find them, and then returned with the other thirty-six into the room in which he exposed himself to the greatest danger of being discovered. I ask you now, is such a theory tenable?



But what other is there? cried the banker with a gesture of despair. If his motives were innocent, why does he not explain them?
It is our task to find that out, replied Holmes; so now, if you please, Mr. Holder, we will set off for Streatham together, and devote an hour to glancing a little more closely into details.
My friend insisted upon my accompanying them in their expedition, which I was eager enough to do, for my curiosity and sympathy were deeply stirred by the story to which we had listened. I con- fess that the guilt of the bankers son appeared to me to be as obvious as it did to his unhappy father, but still I had such faith in Holmes judgment that I felt that there must be some grounds for hope as long as he was dissatisfied with the accepted expla- nation. He hardly spoke a word the whole way out to the southern suburb, but sat with his chin upon his breast and his hat drawn over his eyes, sunk in the deepest thought. Our client appeared to have taken fresh heart at the little glimpse of hope which had been presented to him, and he even broke into a desultory chat with me over his business affairs. A short railway journey and a shorter walk brought us to Fairbank, the modest residence of the great financier.
Fairbank was a good-sized square house of white stone,  standing back a little from the road.  A double carriage-sweep, with a snow-clad lawn, stretched down in front to two large iron gates which closed the entrance. On the right side was a small wooden thicket, which led into a narrow path between two neat hedges stretching from the road to the kitchen door, and forming the tradesmens entrance. On the left ran a lane which led to the stables, and was not itself within the grounds at  all, being a public, though little used, thoroughfare. Holmes left us standing at the door and walked slowly all round the house, across the front, down the tradesmens path, and so round by the garden behind into the stable lane. So long was he that  Mr. Holder and I went into the dining-room and waited by the fire until he should return. We were sitting there in silence when the door opened and  a young lady came in. She was rather above the middle height, slim, with dark hair and eyes, which seemed the darker against the absolute pallor of her skin. I do not think that I have ever seen such deadly paleness in a womans face. Her lips, too, were bloodless, but her eyes were flushed with crying. As she swept silently into the room she impressed me with a greater sense of grief than  the banker had done in the morning, and it was  the more striking in her as she was evidently a
woman of strong character, with immense capacity for self-restraint. Disregarding my presence, she went straight to her uncle and passed her hand over his head with a sweet womanly caress.
You have given orders that Arthur should be liberated, have you not, dad? she asked.
No, no, my girl, the matter must be probed to the bottom.
But I am so sure that he is innocent. You know what womans instincts are. I know that he has done no harm and that you will be sorry for having acted so harshly.
Why is he silent, then, if he is innocent? Who knows? Perhaps because he was so angry
that you should suspect him.
How could I help suspecting him, when I ac- tually saw him with the coronet in his hand?
Oh,  but he had only picked it up to look at     it. Oh, do, do take my word for it that he is inno- cent. Let the matter drop and say no more. It is so dreadful to think of our dear Arthur in a prison!
I shall never let it drop until the gems are foundnever, Mary! Your affection for Arthur blinds you as to the awful consequences to me. Far from hushing the thing up, I have brought a gen- tleman down from London to inquire more deeply into it.
This gentleman? she asked, facing round to me.
No, his friend. He wished us to leave him alone. He is round in the stable lane now.
The stable lane? She raised her dark eyebrows. What can he hope to find there? Ah! this, I sup- pose, is he. I trust, sir, that you will succeed in prov- ing, what I feel sure is the truth, that my cousin Arthur is innocent of this crime.
I fully share your opinion, and I trust, with you, that we may prove it, returned Holmes, go- ing back to the mat to knock the snow from his shoes. I believe I have the honour of addressing Miss Mary Holder. Might I ask you a question or two?
Pray do, sir, if it may help to clear this horrible affair up.
You heard nothing yourself last night? Nothing, until my uncle here began to speak
loudly. I heard that, and I came down.
You shut up the windows and doors the night before. Did you fasten all the windows?
Yes.
Were they all fastened this morning? Yes.



You have a maid who has a sweetheart? I think that you remarked to your uncle last night that she had been out to see him?
Yes, and she was the girl who waited in the drawing-room, and who may have heard uncles remarks about the coronet.
I see. You  infer that she may  have  gone out  to tell her sweetheart, and that the two may have planned the robbery.
But what is the good of all these vague theo- ries, cried the banker impatiently, when I have told you that I saw Arthur with the coronet in his hands?
Wait a little, Mr. Holder. We must come back to that. About this girl, Miss Holder. You saw her return by the kitchen door, I presume?
Yes; when I went to see if the door was fas- tened for the night I met her slipping in. I saw the man, too, in the gloom.
Do you know him?
Oh, yes! he is the green-grocer who brings our vegetables round. His name is Francis Prosper.
He stood, said Holmes, to the left of the doorthat is to say, farther up the path than is necessary to reach the door?
Yes, he did.
And he is a man with a wooden leg?
Something like fear sprang up in the young ladys expressive black eyes. Why, you  are like  a magician, said she. How do you know that? She smiled, but there was no answering smile in Holmes thin, eager face.
I should be very glad now to go upstairs, said he. I shall probably wish to go over the outside of the house again. Perhaps I had better take a look at the lower windows before I go up.
He walked swiftly round from one to the other, pausing only at the large one which looked from the hall onto the stable lane. This he opened and made a very careful examination of the  sill with his powerful magnifying lens. Now we shall go upstairs, said he at last.
The bankers dressing-room was a plainly fur- nished little chamber, with a grey carpet, a large bureau, and a long mirror. Holmes went to the bureau first and looked hard at the lock.
Which key was used to open it? he asked. That which my son himself indicatedthat of
the cupboard of the lumber-room. Have you it here?
That is it on the dressing-table.
Sherlock Holmes took it up and opened the bureau.
It is a noiseless lock, said he. It is no wonder that it did not wake you. This case, I presume, contains the coronet. We must have a look at it.  He opened the case, and taking out the diadem he laid it upon the table. It was a magnificent speci- men of the jewellers art, and the thirty-six stones were the finest that I have ever  seen.  At one side  of the coronet was a cracked edge, where a corner holding three gems had been torn away.
Now, Mr. Holder, said Holmes, here is the corner which corresponds to that which has been so unfortunately lost. Might I beg that you will break it off.
The banker recoiled in horror. I should not dream of trying, said he.
Then I will. Holmes suddenly bent his strength upon it, but without result.  I feel it give  a little, said he; but, though I am exceptionally strong in the fingers, it would take me all my time to break it. An ordinary man could not do it. Now, what do you think would happen if I did break it, Mr. Holder? There would be a noise like a pistol shot. Do you tell me that all this happened within a few yards of your bed and that you heard nothing of it?
I do not know what to think. It is all dark to me.
But perhaps it may grow lighter as we go.
What do you think, Miss Holder?
I confess that I still share my uncles perplex- ity.
Your son had no shoes or slippers on when you saw him?
He had nothing on save only his trousers and shirt.
Thank you. We have certainly been favoured with extraordinary luck during this inquiry, and it will be entirely our own fault if we do not succeed in clearing the matter up. With your permission, Mr. Holder, I shall now continue my investigations outside.
He went alone, at his own request, for he ex- plained that any unnecessary footmarks might make his task more difficult. For an hour or more he was at work, returning at last with his feet heavy with snow and his features as inscrutable as ever.
I think that I have seen now all that there is to see, Mr. Holder, said he; I can serve you best by returning to my rooms.
But the gems, Mr. Holmes. Where are they? I cannot tell.



The banker wrung his hands. I shall never see them again! he cried. And my son? You give me hopes?
My opinion is in no way altered.
Then, for Gods sake, what was this dark busi- ness which was acted in my house last night?
If you can call upon me at my Baker Street rooms to-morrow morning between nine and ten I shall be happy to do what I can to make it clearer. I understand that you give me carte blanche to act for you, provided only that I get back the gems, and that you place no limit on the sum I may draw.
I would give my fortune to have them back. Very good. I shall look into the matter between
this and then. Good-bye; it is just possible that I may have  to come over here again before evening.
It was obvious to me that my companions mind was now made up about the case, although what his conclusions were was more than I could even dimly imagine. Several times during our home- ward journey I endeavoured to sound him upon the point, but he always glided away to some other topic, until at last I gave it over in despair. It was not yet three when we found ourselves in our rooms once more. He hurried to his chamber and was down again in a few minutes dressed as a common loafer. With his collar turned up, his shiny, seedy coat, his red cravat, and his worn boots, he was a perfect sample of the class.
I think that this should do, said he, glancing into the glass above the fireplace. I only wish that you could come with me,  Watson,  but I fear that  it wont do. I may be on the trail in this matter, or  I may be following a will-o-the-wisp, but I shall soon know which it is. I hope that I may be back in a few hours. He cut a slice of beef from the joint upon the sideboard, sandwiched it between two rounds of bread, and thrusting this rude meal into his pocket he started off upon his expedition.
I had just finished my tea when he returned, ev- idently in excellent spirits, swinging an old elastic- sided boot in his hand. He chucked it down into a corner and helped himself to a cup of tea.
I only looked in as I passed, said he. I am going right on.
Where to?
Oh, to the other side of the West End. It may be some time before I get back. Dont wait up for me in case I should be late.
How are you getting on?
Oh, so so. Nothing to complain of. I have been out to Streatham since I saw you last, but I did not
call at the house. It is a very sweet little problem, and I would not have missed it for a good deal. However, I must not sit gossiping here, but must get these disreputable clothes off and return to my highly respectable self.
I could see by his manner that he had stronger reasons for satisfaction than his words alone would imply. His eyes twinkled, and there was even a touch of colour upon his sallow cheeks. He has- tened upstairs, and a few minutes later I heard the slam of the hall door, which told me that he was  off once more upon his congenial hunt.
I waited until midnight, but there was no sign of his return, so I retired to my room. It was no uncommon thing for him to be away for days and nights on end when he was hot upon a scent, so that his lateness caused me no surprise. I do not know at what hour he came in, but when I came down to breakfast in the morning there he was with a cup of coffee in one hand and the paper in the other, as fresh and trim as possible.
You will excuse my beginning without you, Watson, said he, but you remember that our client has rather an early appointment this morning.
Why, it is after nine now, I answered. I should not be surprised if that were he. I thought I heard a ring.
It was, indeed, our friend the financier. I was shocked by the change which had come over him, for his face which was naturally of a broad and mas- sive mould, was now pinched and fallen in, while his hair seemed to me at least a shade whiter. He entered with a weariness and lethargy which was even more painful than his violence of the morning before, and he dropped heavily into the armchair which I pushed forward for him.
I do not know what I have done to be so severely tried, said he. Only two  days ago I was  a happy and prosperous man, without a care in the world. Now I am left to a lonely and dishonoured age. One sorrow comes close upon the heels of another. My niece, Mary, has deserted me.
Deserted you?
Yes. Her bed this morning had not been slept in, her room was empty, and a note for me lay upon the hall table. I had said to her last night, in sorrow and not in anger, that if she had married my boy all might have been well with him. Perhaps it was thoughtless of me to say so. It is to that remark that she refers in this note:



 My dearest Uncle:
 I feel that I have brought trouble upon you, and that if I had acted dif- ferently this terrible misfortune might never have occurred. I  cannot,  with this thought in my  mind,  ever  again be happy under your roof, and I feel that I must leave you forever. Do not worry about my future, for that is pro- vided for; and, above all, do not search for me, for it will be fruitless labour and an ill-service to me. In life or in death, I am ever
  Your loving  Mary.

What could she mean by that note, Mr.
Holmes? Do you think it points to suicide?
No, no, nothing of the kind. It is perhaps the best possible solution. I trust, Mr. Holder, that you are nearing the end of your troubles.
Ha! You say so! You have heard something,  Mr. Holmes; you have learned something! Where are the gems?
You would not think 1000 pounds apiece an excessive sum for them?
I would pay ten.
That would be unnecessary. Three thousand will cover the matter. And there is a little reward, I fancy. Have you your check-book? Here is a pen. Better make it out for 4000.
With a dazed face the banker made out the re- quired check. Holmes walked over to his desk, took out a little triangular piece of gold with three gems in it, and threw it down upon the table.
With a shriek of joy our client clutched it up. You have it! he gasped. I am saved! I am
saved!
The reaction of joy was as passionate as his grief had been, and he hugged his recovered gems to his bosom.
There is one other thing you owe, Mr. Holder, said Sherlock Holmes rather sternly.
Owe! He caught up a pen. Name the sum, and I will pay it.
No, the debt is not to me. You owe a very humble apology to that noble lad, your son, who has carried himself in this matter as I should be proud to see my own son do, should I ever chance to have one.
Then it was not Arthur who took them?
I told you yesterday, and I repeat to-day, that it was not.
You are sure of it! Then let us hurry to him at once to let him know that the truth is known.
He knows it already. When I had cleared it all up I had an interview with him, and finding that he would not tell me the story, I told it to him, on which he had to confess that I was right and to add the very few details which were not yet quite clear to me. Your news of this morning, however, may open his lips.
For heavens sake, tell me, then, what is this extraordinary mystery!
I will do so, and I will show you the steps by which I reached it. And let me say to you, first,  that which it is hardest for me to say and for you to hear: there has been an understanding between Sir George Burnwell and your niece Mary. They have now fled together.
My Mary? Impossible!
It is unfortunately more than possible; it is cer- tain. Neither you nor your son knew the true char- acter of this man when you admitted him into your family circle. He is one of the most dangerous men in Englanda ruined gambler, an absolutely des- perate villain, a man without heart or conscience. Your niece knew nothing of such men. When he breathed his vows to her, as he had done to a hun- dred before her, she flattered herself that she alone had touched his heart. The devil knows best what he said, but at least she became his tool and was in the habit of seeing him nearly every evening.
I cannot, and I will not, believe it! cried the banker with an ashen face.
I will tell you, then, what occurred in your house last night. Your niece,  when  you  had,  as she thought, gone to your room, slipped down and talked to her lover through the window which leads into the stable lane. His footmarks had pressed right through the snow, so long had he stood there. She told him of the coronet. His wicked lust for gold kindled at the news, and he bent her to his will. I have no doubt that she loved you, but there are women in whom the love of a lover extinguishes all other loves, and I think that she must have been one. She had hardly listened to his instructions when she saw you coming downstairs, on which she closed the window rapidly and told you about one of the servants escapade with her wooden- legged lover, which was all perfectly true.
Your boy, Arthur, went to bed after his inter- view with you but he slept badly on account of his uneasiness about his club debts. In the middle of



the night he heard a soft tread pass his door,  so   he rose and, looking out, was surprised to see his cousin walking very stealthily along the passage until she disappeared into your dressing-room. Pet- rified with astonishment, the lad slipped on some clothes and waited there in the dark to see what would come of this strange affair. Presently she emerged from the room again, and in the light of the passage-lamp your son saw that she carried the precious coronet in her hands. She passed down the stairs, and he, thrilling with horror, ran along and slipped behind the curtain near your door, whence he could see what passed in the hall beneath. He saw her stealthily open the window, hand out the coronet to someone in the gloom, and then closing it once more hurry back to her room, passing quite close to where he stood hid behind the curtain.
As long as she was on the scene he could not take any action without a horrible exposure of the woman whom he loved. But the instant that she was gone he realised how crushing a misfortune this would be for you, and how all-important  it was to set it right. He rushed down, just as he was, in his bare feet, opened the window, sprang out into the snow, and ran down the lane, where he could see a dark figure in the moonlight. Sir George Burnwell tried to get away, but Arthur caught him, and there was a struggle between them, your lad tugging at one side of the coronet, and his oppo- nent at the other. In the scuffle, your son struck  Sir George and cut him over the eye. Then some- thing suddenly snapped, and your son,  finding that he had the coronet in his hands, rushed back, closed the window, ascended to your room, and had just observed that the coronet had been twisted in the struggle and was endeavouring to straighten it when you appeared upon the scene.
Is it possible? gasped the banker.
You then roused his anger by calling him names at a moment when he felt that he had de- served your warmest thanks. He could not explain the true state of affairs without betraying one who certainly deserved little enough consideration at his hands. He took the more chivalrous view, however, and preserved her secret.
And that was why she shrieked and fainted when she saw the coronet, cried Mr. Holder. Oh, my God! what a blind fool I have been! And his asking to be allowed to go out for five minutes! The dear fellow wanted to see if the missing piece were at the scene of the struggle. How cruelly I have misjudged him!
When I arrived at the house, continued Holmes, I at once went very carefully round it to
observe if there were any traces in the snow which might help me. I knew that none had fallen since the evening before, and also that there had been a strong frost to preserve impressions. I passed along the tradesmens path, but found it all trampled down and indistinguishable. Just beyond it, how- ever, at the far side of the kitchen door, a woman had stood and talked with a man, whose round im- pressions on one side showed that he had a wooden leg. I could even tell that they had been disturbed, for the woman had run back swiftly to the door, as was shown by the deep toe and light heel marks, while Wooden-leg had waited a little, and then had gone away. I thought at the time that this might be the maid and her sweetheart, of whom you had al- ready spoken to me, and inquiry showed it was  so. I passed round the garden without seeing anything more than random tracks, which I took to be the police; but when I got into the stable lane a very long and complex story was written in the snow in front of me.
There was a double line of tracks of a booted man, and a second double line which I saw with delight belonged to a man with naked feet.  I was  at once convinced from what you had told me that the latter was your son. The first had walked both ways, but the other had run swiftly, and as his tread was marked in places over the depression of the boot, it was obvious that he had passed after the other. I followed them up and found they led to the hall window, where Boots had worn all the snow away while waiting. Then I walked to the  other end, which was a hundred yards or more down the lane. I saw where Boots had faced round, where the snow was cut up as though there had been a struggle, and, finally, where a few drops of blood had fallen, to show me that I was not mistaken. Boots had then run down the lane, and another little smudge of blood showed that it was he who had been hurt. When he came to the highroad at the other end, I found that the pavement had been cleared, so there was an end to that clue.
On entering the house, however, I examined,  as you remember, the sill and framework of the hall window with my lens, and I could at once see that someone had passed out. I could distinguish the outline of an instep where the wet foot had been placed in coming in. I was then beginning to be able to form an opinion as to what had occurred.   A man had waited outside the window; someone had brought the gems; the deed had been overseen by your son; he had pursued the thief; had strug- gled with him; they had each tugged at the coronet, their united strength causing injuries which neither alone could have effected. He had returned with



the prize, but had left a fragment in the grasp of his opponent. So far I was clear. The question now was, who was the man and who was it brought him the coronet?
It is an old maxim of mine that when you have excluded the impossible, whatever remains, how- ever improbable, must be the truth. Now, I knew that it was not you who had brought it down, so there only remained your niece and the maids. But if it were the maids, why should your son allow himself to be accused in their place? There could be no possible reason. As he loved his cousin, how- ever, there was an excellent explanation why he should retain her secretthe more so as the secret was a disgraceful one. When I remembered that you had seen her at that window, and how she had fainted on seeing the coronet again, my conjecture became a certainty.
And who could it be who was her confederate? A lover evidently, for who else could outweigh the love and gratitude which she must feel to you? I knew that you went out little, and that your circle of friends was a very limited one. But among them was Sir George Burnwell. I had heard of him before as being a man of evil reputation among women.   It must have been he who wore those boots and retained the missing gems. Even though he knew that Arthur had discovered him, he might still flat- ter himself that he was safe, for the lad could not say a word without compromising his own family.
Well, your own good sense will suggest what measures I took next. I went in the shape of a loafer to Sir Georges house, managed to pick up an ac- quaintance with his valet, learned that his master had cut his head the night before, and, finally, at the expense of six shillings,  made all sure by  buying   a pair of his cast-off shoes. With these I journeyed down to Streatham and saw that they exactly fitted the tracks.
I saw an ill-dressed vagabond in the lane yes- terday evening, said Mr. Holder.
Precisely. It was I. I found that I had my man, so I came home and changed my clothes.  It was     a delicate part which I had to play then, for I saw that a prosecution must be avoided to avert scandal, and I knew that so astute a villain would see that our hands were tied in the matter. I went and saw him. At first, of course, he denied everything. But when I gave him every particular that had occurred, he tried to bluster and took down a life-preserver from the wall. I knew my man, however, and I clapped a pistol to his head before he could strike. Then he became a little more reasonable. I told him that we would give him a price for the stones he held1000 apiece. That brought out the first signs of grief that he had shown. Why, dash it all! said he,  Ive let them go at six hundred for the three!   I soon managed to get the address of the receiver who had them, on promising him that there would be no prosecution. Off I set to him, and after much chaffering I got our stones at 1000 pounds apiece. Then I looked in upon your son, told him that all was right, and eventually got to my bed about two oclock, after what I may call a really hard days work.

A day which has saved England from a great public scandal, said the banker, rising. Sir, I can- not find words to thank you, but you shall not find me ungrateful for what you have done. Your skill has indeed exceeded all that I have heard of it. And now I must fly to my dear boy to apologise to him for the wrong which I have done him. As to what you tell me of poor Mary, it goes to my very heart. Not even your skill can inform me where she is now.

I think that we may safely say, returned Holmes, that she is wherever Sir George Burn- well is. It is equally certain,  too,  that  whatever her sins are, they will soon receive a more than sufficient punishment.




























The Adventure of the Copper Beeches





T
o the man who loves art for its own sake, remarked Sherlock Holmes, tossing aside the advertisement sheet of the Daily Tele- graph, it is frequently in its least  impor-
tant and lowliest manifestations that the keenest pleasure is to be derived. It is pleasant to me to observe, Watson, that you have so far grasped this truth that in these little records of our cases which you have been good enough to draw up, and, I am bound to say, occasionally to embellish, you have given prominence not so much to the many causes cele`bres and sensational trials in which I have fig- ured but rather to those incidents which may have been trivial in themselves, but which have given room for those faculties of deduction and of logical synthesis which I have  made my special province.
And yet, said I, smiling, I cannot quite hold myself absolved from the charge of sensationalism which has been urged against my records.
You have erred, perhaps, he observed, taking up a glowing cinder with the tongs and lighting with it the long cherry-wood pipe which was wont to replace his clay when he was in a disputatious rather than a meditative moodyou have erred perhaps in attempting to put colour and life into each of your statements instead of confining your- self to the task of placing upon record that severe reasoning from cause to effect which is really the only notable feature about the thing.
It seems to me that I have done you full justice in the matter, I remarked with some coldness, for I was repelled by the egotism which I had more than once observed to be a strong factor in my friends singular character.
No, it is not selfishness or conceit, said he, an- swering, as was his wont, my thoughts rather than my words. If I claim full justice for my art, it is because it is an impersonal thinga thing beyond myself. Crime is common. Logic is rare. Therefore it is upon the logic rather than upon the crime that you should dwell. You have degraded what should have been a course of lectures into a series of tales.
It was a cold morning of the early spring, and we sat after breakfast on either side of a cheery  fire in the old room at Baker Street. A thick fog rolled down between the lines of dun-coloured houses, and the opposing windows loomed like dark, shapeless blurs through the heavy yellow wreaths. Our gas was lit and shone on the white cloth and glimmer of china and metal, for the table had not been cleared yet. Sherlock Holmes had been silent all the morning, dipping continuously into the advertisement columns of a succession of papers until at last, having apparently given up his
search, he had emerged in no very sweet temper to lecture me upon my literary shortcomings.
At the same time, he remarked after a pause, during which he had sat puffing at his long pipe and gazing down into the fire, you can hardly be open to a charge of sensationalism, for out of these cases which you have been so kind as to interest yourself in, a fair proportion do not treat of crime, in its legal sense, at all.  The small matter in which I endeavoured to help the King of Bohemia, the singular experience of Miss Mary Sutherland, the problem connected with the man with the twisted lip, and the incident of the noble bachelor,  were  all matters which are outside the pale of the law. But in avoiding the sensational, I fear that you may have bordered on the trivial.
The end may have been so, I answered, but the methods I hold to have been novel and of inter- est.
Pshaw, my dear fellow, what  do  the  public, the great unobservant public, who could  hardly tell a weaver by his tooth or a compositor by his  left thumb, care about the finer shades of analysis and deduction! But, indeed, if you are trivial, I cannot blame you, for the days of the great cases are past. Man, or at least criminal man,  has lost  all enterprise and originality. As to my own little practice, it seems to be degenerating into an agency for recovering lost lead pencils and giving advice  to young ladies from boarding-schools. I think that I have  touched bottom at last, however.  This note  I had this morning marks my zero-point, I fancy. Read it! He tossed a crumpled letter across to me.
It was dated from Montague Place upon the preceding evening, and ran thus:
Dear Mr. Holmes:
I am very anxious to consult you as to whether I should or should not accept  a situation which has been offered to me as governess. I shall call at half-past ten to-morrow if I do not inconvenience you.
 Yours faithfully, Violet Hunter.
Do you know the young lady? I asked. Not I.
It is half-past ten now.
Yes, and I have no doubt that is her ring.
It may turn out to be of more interest than you think. You remember that the affair of the blue carbuncle, which appeared to be a mere whim at first, developed into a serious investigation. It may be so in this case, also.



Well, let us hope so. But our doubts will very soon be solved, for here, unless I am much mis- taken, is the person in question.
As he spoke the door opened and  a  young  lady entered the room. She was plainly but neatly dressed, with  a  bright,  quick  face,  freckled  like a plovers egg, and with the brisk manner of a woman who has had her own way to make in the world.
You will excuse my troubling you, I am sure, said she, as my companion rose to greet her, but I have had a very strange experience, and as I have no parents or relations of any sort from whom I could ask advice, I thought that perhaps you would be kind enough to tell me what I should do.
Pray take a seat, Miss Hunter. I shall be happy to do anything that I can to serve you.
I could see that Holmes was favourably im- pressed by the manner and speech of his new client. He looked her over in his searching fashion, and then composed himself, with his lids drooping and his finger-tips together, to listen to her story.
I have been a governess for five years, said she, in the family of Colonel Spence Munro, but two months ago the colonel received an appointment  at Halifax, in Nova Scotia, and took his children over to America with him, so that I found myself without a situation. I advertised, and I answered advertisements, but without success. At last the little money which I had saved began to run short, and I was at my wits end as to what I should do.
There is a well-known agency for governesses in the West End called Westaways, and there I used to call about once a week in order to see whether anything had turned up which might suit me. West- away was the name of the founder of the business, but it is really managed by Miss Stoper. She sits in her own little office, and the ladies who are seek- ing employment wait in an anteroom, and are then shown in one by one, when she consults her ledgers and sees whether she has anything which would suit them.
Well, when I called last week I was shown into the little office as usual, but I found that Miss Stoper was not alone. A prodigiously stout man with a very smiling face and a great heavy chin which rolled down in fold upon fold over his throat sat at her elbow with a pair of glasses on his nose, looking very earnestly at the ladies who entered. As I came in he gave quite a jump in his chair and turned quickly to Miss Stoper.
 That will do, said he; I could not ask for anything better. Capital! capital! He seemed quite
enthusiastic and rubbed his hands together in the most genial fashion. He was such a comfortable- looking man that it was quite a pleasure to look at him.
 You are looking for a situation, miss? he asked.
 Yes, sir.
 As governess?  Yes, sir.
 And what salary do you ask?
 I had 4 a month in my last place with Colonel Spence Munro.
 Oh, tut, tut! sweatingrank sweating! he cried, throwing his fat hands out into the air like   a man who is in a boiling passion. How could anyone offer so pitiful a sum to a lady with such attractions and accomplishments?
 My accomplishments, sir, may be less than you imagine, said I. A little French, a little Ger- man, music, and drawing
 Tut, tut! he cried. This is all quite beside the question. The point is, have you or have you not  the bearing and deportment of a lady? There it is in a nutshell. If you have not, you are not fitted for the rearing of a child who may some day play a considerable part in the history of the country. But if you have why, then, how could any gentleman  ask you to condescend to accept anything under the three figures? Your salary with me, madam, would commence at 100 a year.
You may imagine, Mr. Holmes, that to me, destitute as I was, such an offer seemed almost  too good to be true. The gentleman, however, see- ing perhaps the look of incredulity upon my face, opened a pocket-book and took out a note.
 It is also my custom, said he, smiling in the most pleasant fashion until his eyes were just two little shining slits amid the white creases of his face, to advance to my young ladies half their salary be- forehand, so that they may meet any little expenses of their journey and their wardrobe.
It seemed to me that I had never met so fasci- nating and so thoughtful a man. As I was already  in debt to my tradesmen, the advance was a great convenience, and yet there was something unnat- ural about the whole transaction which made me wish to know a little more before I quite committed myself.
 May I ask where you live, sir? said I.
 Hampshire. Charming rural place. The Cop- per Beeches, five miles on the far side of Winchester. It is the most lovely country, my dear young lady, and the dearest old country-house.



 And my duties, sir? I should be glad to know what they would be.
 One childone dear little romper just six years old. Oh, if you could see him killing cock- roaches with a slipper! Smack! smack! smack! Three gone before you could wink! He leaned back in his chair and laughed his eyes into his head again.
I was a little startled at the nature of the childs amusement, but the fathers laughter made me think that perhaps he was joking.
 My sole duties, then, I asked, are to take charge of a single child?
 No, no, not the sole, not the sole, my dear young lady, he cried. Your duty would be, as I am sure your good sense would suggest, to obey any little commands my wife might give, provided always that they were such commands as a lady might with propriety obey. You see no difficulty, heh?
 I should be happy to make myself useful.
 Quite so. In dress now, for example. We are faddy people, you knowfaddy but kind-hearted. If you were asked to wear any dress which we  might give you, you would not object to our little whim. Heh?
 No, said I, considerably astonished at his words.
 Or to sit here, or sit there, that would not be offensive to you?
 Oh, no.
 Or to cut your hair quite short before you come to us?
I could hardly believe my ears. As you may observe, Mr. Holmes, my hair is somewhat luxu- riant, and of a rather peculiar tint of chestnut. It has been considered artistic. I could not dream of sacrificing it in this offhand fashion.
 I am afraid that that is quite impossible, said
I. He had been watching me eagerly out of his small eyes, and I could see a shadow pass over his face  as I spoke.
 I am afraid that it is quite essential, said he. It is a little fancy of my wifes, and  ladies fan- cies, you know, madam, ladies fancies must be consulted. And so you wont cut your hair?
 No, sir,  I really could not, I answered  firmly.
 Ah, very well; then that quite settles the mat- ter. It is a pity, because in other respects you would really  have  done  very  nicely.    In  that  case, Miss
Stoper, I had best inspect a few more of your young ladies.
The manageress had sat all this while busy with her papers without a word to either of us, but she glanced at me now with so much annoyance upon her face that I could not help suspecting that she had lost a handsome commission through my refusal.
 Do you desire your name to be kept upon the books? she asked.
 If you please, Miss Stoper.
 Well, really, it seems rather useless, since you refuse the most excellent offers in this fashion, said she sharply. You can hardly expect us to exert ourselves to find another such opening for you. Good-day to you, Miss Hunter. She struck a gong upon the table, and I was shown out by the page.
Well, Mr. Holmes, when I got back to my lodg- ings and found little enough in the cupboard, and two or three bills upon the table. I began to ask myself whether I had not done a very foolish thing. After all, if these people had strange fads and ex- pected obedience on the most extraordinary mat- ters, they were at least ready to pay for their ec- centricity. Very few governesses in England are getting 100 a year. Besides, what use was my hair to me? Many people are improved by wearing it short and perhaps I should be among the number. Next day I was inclined to think that I had made a mistake, and by the day after I was sure of it. I had almost overcome my pride so far as to go back to the agency and inquire whether the place was still open when I received this letter from the gentleman himself. I have it here and I will read it to you:
 The Copper Beeches, near Winchester.  Dear Miss Hunter:
 Miss Stoper has very kindly given
me your address, and I write from here to ask you whether you have reconsid- ered your decision. My wife is very anxious that you should come, for she has been much attracted by my descrip- tion of you.  We  are willing to give  30 a quarter, or 120 a year, so as to recom- pense you for any little inconvenience which our fads may cause you.  They are not very exacting, after all. My wife is fond of a particular shade of electric blue and would like you  to wear such   a dress indoors in the morning. You need not, however, go to the expense of purchasing one, as we have one belong- ing to my dear daughter Alice (now in



Philadelphia), which would, I should think, fit you very well. Then, as to sitting here or there, or amusing your- self in any manner indicated, that need cause you no inconvenience. As regards your hair, it is no doubt a pity, espe- cially as I could not help remarking its beauty during our short interview, but I am afraid that I must remain firm upon this point, and I only hope that the in- creased salary may recompense you for the loss. Your duties, as far as the child is concerned, are very light. Now do try to come, and I shall meet you with the dog-cart at Winchester. Let me know your train.
  Yours faithfully,  Jephro Rucastle.
That is the letter which I have just received, Mr. Holmes, and my mind is made up that I will accept it. I thought, however, that before taking the final step I should like to submit the whole matter to your consideration.
Well, Miss Hunter, if your mind is made up, that settles the question, said Holmes, smiling.
But you would not advise me to refuse?
I confess that it is not the situation which I should like to see a sister of mine apply for.
What is the meaning of it all, Mr. Holmes? Ah, I have no data. I cannot tell. Perhaps you
have yourself formed some opinion?
Well, there seems to me to be only one possible solution. Mr. Rucastle seemed to be a very kind, good-natured man. Is it not possible that his wife is a lunatic, that he desires to keep the matter quiet for fear she should be taken to an asylum, and that he humours her fancies in every way in order to prevent an outbreak?
That is a possible solutionin fact, as matters stand, it is the most probable one. But in any case it does not seem to be a nice household for a young lady.
But the money, Mr. Holmes, the money! Well, yes, of course the pay is goodtoo good.
That is what makes me uneasy. Why should they give you 120 a year, when they could have their pick for 40? There must be some strong reason behind.
I thought that if I told you the circumstances you would understand afterwards if I wanted your help. I should feel so much stronger if I felt that you were at the back of me.
Oh, you may  carry that feeling away  with you. I assure you that your little problem promises to  be the most interesting which has come my way  for some months. There is something distinctly novel about some of the features. If you should  find yourself in doubt or in danger
Danger! What danger do you foresee?
Holmes shook his head gravely. It would cease to be a danger if we could define it, said he. But at any time, day or night, a telegram would bring me down to your help.
That is enough. She rose briskly from her chair with the anxiety all swept from her face. I shall go down to Hampshire quite easy in my mind now. I shall write to Mr. Rucastle at once, sacrifice my poor hair to-night, and start for Winchester to- morrow. With a few grateful words to Holmes she bade us both good-night and bustled off upon her way.
At least, said I as we heard her quick, firm steps descending the stairs, she seems to be a young lady who is very well able to take care of herself.
And she would need to be, said Holmes gravely. I am much mistaken if we do not hear from her before many days are past.
It was not very long before my friends pre- diction was fulfilled. A  fortnight  went  by, dur-  ing which I frequently found my thoughts  turn- ing in her direction and wondering what strange side-alley of human experience this lonely woman had strayed into. The unusual salary, the curious conditions, the light duties, all pointed to some- thing abnormal, though whether a fad or a plot, or whether the man were a philanthropist or a villain, it was quite beyond my powers  to determine.  As  to Holmes, I observed that he sat frequently for half an hour on end, with knitted brows and an abstracted air, but he swept the matter away with a wave of his hand when I mentioned it. Data! data! data! he cried impatiently. I cant make bricks without clay. And yet he would  always  wind  up by muttering that no sister of his should ever have accepted such a situation.
The telegram which we eventually received came late one night just as I was thinking of turning in and Holmes was settling down to one of those all-night chemical researches which he frequently indulged in, when I would leave him stooping over a retort and a test-tube at night and find him in the same position when I came down to breakfast in the morning. He opened the yellow envelope, and then, glancing at the message, threw it across to me.



Just look up the trains in Bradshaw, said he, and turned back to his chemical studies.
The summons was a brief and urgent one.
Please be at the Black  Swan  Hotel  at Winchester at midday to-morrow [it said]. Do come! I am at my wits end.
 Hunter.
Will you come with me? asked Holmes, glanc- ing up.
I should wish to. Just look it up, then.
There is a train at half-past nine, said I, glanc- ing over my Bradshaw. It is due at Winchester at 11.30.
That will do very nicely. Then perhaps I had better postpone my analysis of the acetones, as we may need to be at our best in the morning.
By eleven oclock the next day we were well upon our way to the old English capital. Holmes had been buried in the morning papers all the way down, but after we had passed the Hampshire bor- der he threw them down and began to admire the scenery. It was an ideal spring day,  a  light  blue sky, flecked with little fleecy white  clouds  drift- ing across from west to east. The sun was shining very brightly, and yet there was an exhilarating nip in the air,  which set an edge to a mans energy.   All over the countryside, away to the rolling hills around Aldershot, the little red and grey roofs of the farm-steadings peeped out from amid the light green of the new foliage.
Are they not fresh and beautiful? I cried with all the enthusiasm of a man fresh from the fogs of Baker Street.
But Holmes shook his head  gravely.
Do you know, Watson, said he, that it is one of the curses of a mind with a turn like mine that I must look at everything with reference to my own special subject. You look at these scattered houses, and you are impressed by their beauty. I look at them, and the only thought which comes to me is a feeling of their isolation and of the impunity with which crime may be committed there.
Good heavens! I cried. Who would associate crime with these dear old homesteads?
They always fill me with a certain horror. It is my belief, Watson, founded upon my experience, that the lowest and vilest alleys in London do not present a more dreadful record of sin than does the smiling and beautiful countryside.
You horrify me!
But the reason is very obvious. The pressure  of public opinion can do in the town what the law cannot accomplish. There is no lane so vile that  the scream of a tortured child, or the thud of a drunkards blow, does not beget sympathy and indignation among the neighbours, and then the whole machinery of justice is ever so close that a word of complaint can set it going,  and there is  but a step between the crime and the dock. But look at these lonely houses, each in its own fields, filled for the most part with poor ignorant folk who know little of the law. Think of the deeds of hellish cruelty, the hidden wickedness which may go on, year in, year out, in such places, and none the wiser. Had this lady who appeals to us for help gone to live in Winchester, I should never have had a fear for her. It is the five miles of country which makes the danger. Still, it is clear that she is not personally threatened.
No. If she can come to Winchester to meet us she can get away.
Quite so. She has her freedom.
What can be the matter, then? Can you suggest no explanation?
I have devised seven separate explanations, each of which would cover the facts as far as we know them. But which of these is correct can only be determined by the fresh information which we shall no doubt find waiting for us. Well, there is  the tower of the cathedral, and we shall soon learn all that Miss Hunter has to tell.
The Black Swan is an inn of repute in the High Street, at no distance from the station, and there we found the young lady waiting for us. She had engaged a sitting-room, and our lunch awaited us upon the table.
I am so delighted that you have come, she said earnestly. It is so very kind of you both; but indeed I do not know what I should do. Your advice will be altogether invaluable to me.
Pray tell us what has happened to you.
I will do so, and I must be quick, for I have promised Mr. Rucastle to be back before three. I got his leave to come into town this morning, though he little knew for what purpose.
Let us have everything in its due order. Holmes thrust his long thin legs out towards the fire and composed himself to listen.
In the first place, I may say that I have  met,  on the whole, with no actual ill-treatment from Mr. and Mrs. Rucastle. It is only fair to them to say that. But I cannot understand them, and I am not easy in my mind about them.



What can you not understand?
Their reasons for their conduct. But you shall have it all just as it occurred. When I came down, Mr. Rucastle met me here and drove me in his dog- cart to the Copper Beeches. It is, as he said, beau- tifully situated, but it is not beautiful in itself, for  it is a large square block of a house, whitewashed, but all stained and streaked with damp and bad weather. There are grounds round it, woods on three sides, and on the fourth a field which slopes down to the Southampton highroad, which curves past about a hundred yards from the front door. This ground in front belongs to the house, but the woods all round are part of Lord Southertons pre- serves. A clump of  copper  beeches  immediately in front of the hall door has given its name to the place.
I was driven over by  my  employer,  who  was as amiable as ever, and was introduced by him that evening to his wife and the child. There was no truth, Mr. Holmes, in the conjecture which seemed to us to be probable in your rooms at Baker Street. Mrs. Rucastle is not mad. I found her to be a silent, pale-faced woman, much younger than her hus- band, not more than thirty, I should think, while  he can hardly be less than forty-five. From their conversation I have gathered that they have been married about seven years, that he was a widower, and that his only child by the first wife was the daughter who has gone to Philadelphia. Mr. Rucas- tle told me in private that the reason why she had left them was that she had an unreasoning aversion to her stepmother. As the daughter could not have been less than twenty, I can quite imagine that her position must have been uncomfortable with her fathers young wife.
Mrs. Rucastle seemed to me to be colourless in mind as well as in feature. She impressed me nei- ther favourably nor the reverse. She was a nonentity. It was easy to see that she was passionately devoted both to her husband and to her little son. Her light grey eyes wandered continually from one to the other,  noting every little want and forestalling it    if possible. He was kind to her also in his bluff, boisterous fashion, and on the whole they seemed to be a happy couple. And yet she had some se-  cret sorrow, this woman. She would often  be lost in deep thought, with the saddest look upon her face. More than once I have surprised her in tears. I have thought sometimes that it was the disposi- tion of her child which weighed upon her mind,  for I have never met so utterly spoiled and so ill- natured a little creature. He is small for his age, with a head which is quite disproportionately large.
His whole life appears to be spent in an alterna- tion between savage fits of passion and gloomy intervals of sulking. Giving pain to any creature weaker than himself seems to be his one idea of amusement, and he shows quite remarkable talent in planning the capture of mice, little birds, and insects. But I would rather not talk about the crea- ture, Mr. Holmes, and, indeed, he has little to do with my story.
I am glad of all details, remarked my friend, whether they seem to you to be relevant or not.
I shall try not to miss anything of importance. The one unpleasant thing about the house, which struck me at once, was the appearance and conduct of the servants.  There are only two,  a man and  his wife. Toller, for that is his name, is a rough, uncouth man, with grizzled hair and whiskers, and a perpetual smell of drink. Twice since I have been with them he has been quite drunk, and yet Mr. Rucastle seemed to take no notice of it.  His wife   is a very tall and strong woman with a sour face,   as silent as Mrs. Rucastle and much less amiable. They are a most unpleasant couple, but fortunately I spend most of my time in the nursery and my own room, which are next to each other in one corner of the building.
For two days after my arrival at the Copper Beeches my life was very quiet; on the third, Mrs. Rucastle came down just after breakfast and whis- pered something to her husband.
 Oh, yes, said he, turning to me, we are very much obliged to you, Miss Hunter, for falling in with our whims so far as to cut your hair.  I as-  sure you that it has not detracted in the tiniest iota from your appearance. We shall now see how the electric-blue dress will become you. You  will find  it laid out upon the bed in your room, and if you would be so good as to put it on we should both be extremely obliged.
The dress which I found waiting for me was   of a peculiar shade of blue. It was of excellent material, a sort of beige, but it bore unmistakable signs of having been worn before. It could  not have  been a better fit if I had been measured for  it. Both Mr. and Mrs. Rucastle expressed a delight at the look of it, which seemed quite exaggerated  in its vehemence. They were waiting for me in the drawing-room, which is a very large room, stretch- ing along the entire front of the house, with three long windows reaching down to the floor. A chair had been placed close to the central window, with its back turned towards it. In this I was asked to  sit, and then Mr. Rucastle, walking up and down



on the other side of the room, began to tell me a se- ries of the funniest stories that I have ever listened to.  You  cannot imagine how comical he was, and   I laughed until I was quite weary. Mrs. Rucastle, however, who has evidently no sense of humour, never so much as smiled, but sat with her hands in her lap, and a sad, anxious look upon her face. Af- ter an hour or so, Mr. Rucastle suddenly remarked that it was time to commence the duties of the day, and that I might change my dress and go to little Edward in the nursery.
Two days later this same performance was gone through under exactly similar circumstances. Again I changed my dress, again I sat in the win- dow, and again I laughed very heartily at the funny stories of which my employer had an immense repertoire, and which he told inimitably. Then he handed me a yellow-backed novel, and moving my chair a little sideways, that my own shadow might not fall upon the page, he begged me to read aloud to him. I read for about ten minutes, beginning in the heart of a chapter, and then suddenly, in the middle of a sentence, he ordered me to cease and to change my dress.
You can easily imagine, Mr. Holmes, how curi- ous I became as to what the meaning of this extraor- dinary performance could possibly be. They were always very careful, I observed, to turn my face away from the window, so that I became consumed with the desire to see what was going on behind  my back. At first it seemed to be impossible, but I soon devised a means. My hand-mirror had been broken, so a happy thought seized me, and I con- cealed a piece of the glass in my handkerchief. On the next occasion, in the midst of my laughter, I put my handkerchief up to my eyes, and was able with a little management to see all that there was behind me. I confess that I was disappointed. There was nothing. At least that was my first impression. At the second glance, however, I perceived that there was a man standing in the Southampton Road, a small bearded man in a grey suit, who seemed to be looking in my direction. The road is an impor- tant highway, and there are usually people there. This man, however, was leaning against the railings which bordered our field and was looking earnestly up. I lowered my handkerchief and glanced at Mrs. Rucastle to find her eyes fixed upon me with a most searching gaze. She said nothing, but I am convinced that she had divined that I had a mirror in my hand and had seen what was behind me. She rose at once.
 Jephro, said she, there is an impertinent fel- low upon the road there who stares up at Miss Hunter.
 No friend of yours, Miss Hunter? he asked.  No, I know no one in these parts.
 Dear me! How very impertinent! Kindly turn round and motion to him to go away.
 Surely it would be better to take no notice.  No, no, we should have him loitering here
always. Kindly turn round and wave him away like that.
I did as I was told, and at the same instant Mrs. Rucastle drew down the blind. That was a week ago, and from that time I have not sat again in the window, nor have I worn the blue dress, nor seen the man in the road.
Pray continue, said Holmes. Your narrative promises to be a most interesting one.
You will find it rather disconnected, I fear, and there may prove to be little relation between the different incidents of which I speak. On the very first day that I was at the Copper Beeches, Mr. Ru- castle took me to a small outhouse which stands near the kitchen door. As we approached it I heard the sharp rattling of a chain, and the sound as of a large animal moving about.
 Look in here! said Mr. Rucastle, showing me a slit between two planks. Is he not a beauty?
I looked through and was conscious of two glowing eyes, and of a vague figure huddled up in the darkness.
 Dont be frightened, said my employer, laugh- ing at the start which I had given. Its only Carlo, my mastiff. I call him mine, but really old Toller, my groom, is the only man who can do anything with him. We feed him once a day, and not too much then, so that he is always as keen as mustard. Toller lets him loose every night, and God help the trespasser whom he lays his fangs upon. For good- ness sake dont you ever on any pretext set your foot over the threshold at night, for its as much as your life is worth.
The warning was no idle one, for two nights later I happened to look out of my bedroom win- dow about two oclock in the morning. It was a beautiful moonlight night, and the lawn in front of the house was silvered over  and almost as bright  as day. I was standing, rapt in the peaceful beauty of the scene, when I was aware that something was moving under the shadow of the copper beeches. As it emerged into the moonshine I saw what it was. It was a giant dog, as large as a calf, tawny tinted, with hanging jowl, black muzzle, and huge project- ing bones. It walked slowly across the lawn and vanished into the shadow upon the other side. That



dreadful sentinel sent a chill to my heart which I do not think that any burglar could have done.
And now I have a very strange experience to tell you. I had, as you know, cut off my hair in London, and I had placed it in a great coil at the bottom of my trunk. One evening, after the child was in bed, I began to amuse myself by examining the furniture of my room and by rearranging my own little things. There was an old chest of drawers in the room, the two upper ones empty and open, the lower one locked. I had filled the first two with my linen,  and as I had still much to pack away         I was naturally annoyed at not having the use of the third drawer. It struck me that it might have been fastened by a mere oversight, so I took out my bunch of keys and tried to open it. The very first key fitted to perfection, and I drew the drawer open. There was only one thing in it, but I am sure that you would never guess what it was. It was my coil of hair.
I took it up and examined it. It was of the same peculiar tint, and the same thickness. But then the impossibility of the thing obtruded itself upon me.  How could my hair have  been locked   in the drawer? With trembling hands I undid my trunk, turned out the contents, and drew from the bottom my own hair. I laid the two tresses together, and I  assure  you  that  they  were  identical.  Was it not extraordinary? Puzzle as I would, I could make nothing at all of what it meant. I returned the strange hair to the drawer, and I said nothing of the matter to the Rucastles as I felt that I had put myself in the wrong by opening a drawer which they had locked.
I am naturally observant, as you may have re- marked, Mr. Holmes, and I soon had a pretty good plan of the whole house in my head. There was one wing, however, which appeared not to be inhabited at all. A door which faced that which led into the quarters of the Tollers  opened into this suite, but  it was invariably locked. One day, however, as I ascended the stair, I met Mr. Rucastle coming out through this door, his keys in his hand, and a look on his face which made him a very different person to the round, jovial man to whom I was accustomed. His cheeks were red, his brow was all crinkled with anger, and the veins stood out at his temples with passion. He locked the door and hurried past me without a word or a look.
This aroused my curiosity, so when I went out for a walk in the grounds with my charge, I strolled round to the side from which I could see the win- dows of this part of the house. There were four of them in a row, three of which were simply dirty,
while the fourth was shuttered up. They were ev- idently all deserted. As I strolled up and down, glancing at them occasionally, Mr. Rucastle came out to me, looking as merry and jovial as ever.
 Ah! said he, you must not think me rude if I passed you without a word, my dear young lady. I was preoccupied with business matters.
I assured him that I was not offended. By the way, said I, you seem to have quite a suite of spare rooms up there, and one of them has the shutters up.
He looked surprised and, as it seemed to me,  a little startled at my remark.
 Photography is one of my hobbies, said he. I have made my dark room up there. But, dear me! what an observant young lady we have come upon. Who would have believed it? Who would have ever believed it? He spoke in a jesting tone, but there was no jest in his eyes as he looked at me. I read suspicion there and annoyance, but no jest.
Well, Mr. Holmes, from the moment that I un- derstood that there was something about that suite of rooms which I was not to know, I was all on fire to go over them.  It was not mere curiosity, though  I have my share of that. It was more a feeling of dutya feeling that some good might come from my penetrating to this place. They talk of womans instinct; perhaps it was womans instinct which gave me that feeling. At any rate, it was there, and  I was keenly on the lookout for any chance to pass the forbidden door.
It was only yesterday that the chance came. I may tell you that, besides Mr. Rucastle, both Toller and his wife find something to do in these deserted rooms, and I once saw him carrying a large black linen bag with him through the door. Recently he has been drinking hard, and yesterday evening he was very drunk; and when I came upstairs there was the key in the door. I have no doubt at all that he had left it there. Mr. and Mrs. Rucastle were both downstairs, and the child was with them, so that I had an admirable opportunity. I turned the key gently in the lock, opened the door, and slipped through.
There was a little passage in front of me, un- papered and uncarpeted, which turned at a right angle at the farther end. Round this corner were three doors in a line, the first and third of which were open. They each led into an empty room, dusty and cheerless, with two windows in the one and one in the other, so thick with dirt that the evening light glimmered dimly through them. The centre door was closed, and across the outside of



it had been fastened one of the broad bars of an iron bed, padlocked at one end to a ring in the wall, and fastened at the other with stout cord. The door itself was locked as well, and the key was not there. This barricaded door corresponded clearly with the shuttered window outside, and yet I could see by the glimmer from beneath it that the room was not in darkness. Evidently there was a skylight which let in light from above. As I stood in the passage gazing at the sinister door and wondering what secret it might veil,  I suddenly heard the sound    of steps within the room and saw a shadow pass backward and forward against the little slit of dim light which shone out from under the door. A mad, unreasoning terror rose up in me at the sight, Mr. Holmes. My overstrung nerves failed me suddenly, and I turned and ranran as though some dread- ful hand were behind me clutching at the skirt of my dress. I rushed down the passage, through the door, and straight into the arms of Mr. Rucastle, who was waiting outside.
 So, said he, smiling, it was you, then. I thought that it must be when I saw the door open.
 Oh, I am so frightened! I panted.
 My dear young lady! my dear young lady!you cannot think how caressing and sooth- ing his manner wasand what has frightened you, my dear young lady?
But his voice was just a little too coaxing. He overdid it. I was keenly on my guard against him.
 I was foolish enough to go into the empty wing,  I answered.   But it is so lonely and eerie   in this dim light that I was frightened and ran out again. Oh, it is so dreadfully still in there!
 Only that? said he, looking at me keenly.   Why, what did you think? I asked.
 Why do you think that I lock this door?  I am sure that I do not know.
 It is to keep people out who have no business there. Do you see? He was still smiling in the most amiable manner.
 I am sure if I had known
 Well, then, you know now. And if you ever put your foot over that threshold againhere in an instant the smile hardened into a grin of rage, and he glared down at me with the face of a de- monIll throw you to the mastiff.
I was so terrified that I do not know what I did. I suppose that I must have rushed past him into my room. I remember nothing until I found myself lying on my bed trembling all over. Then I thought of you, Mr. Holmes. I could not live there
longer without some advice. I was frightened  of the house, of the man, of the woman, of the ser- vants, even of the child. They were all horrible to me. If I could only bring you down all would be well. Of course I might have fled from the house, but my curiosity was almost as strong as my fears. My mind was soon made up. I would send you a wire. I put on my hat and cloak, went down to the office, which is about half a mile from the house, and then returned, feeling very much easier. A hor- rible doubt came into my mind as I approached the door lest the dog might be loose, but I remembered that Toller had drunk himself into a state of insen- sibility that evening, and I knew that he was the only one in the household who had any influence with the savage creature, or who would venture to set him free. I slipped in in safety and lay awake half the night in my joy at the thought of seeing you. I had no difficulty in getting leave to come  into Winchester this morning, but I must be back before three oclock, for Mr. and Mrs. Rucastle are going on a visit, and will be away all the evening,  so that I must look after the child. Now I have told you all my adventures, Mr. Holmes, and I should be very glad if you could tell me what it all means, and, above all, what I should do.
Holmes and I had listened spellbound to this extraordinary story. My friend rose now and paced up and down the room, his hands in his pockets, and an expression of the most profound gravity upon his face.
Is Toller still drunk? he asked.
Yes. I heard his wife tell Mrs. Rucastle that she could do nothing with him.
That is well. And the Rucastles go out to- night?
Yes.
Is there a cellar with a good strong lock? Yes, the wine-cellar.
You seem to me to have acted all through this matter like a very brave and sensible girl, Miss Hunter. Do you think that you could perform one more feat? I should not ask it of you if I did not think you a quite exceptional woman.
I will try. What is it?
We shall be at the Copper Beeches by seven oclock, my friend and I. The Rucastles will be gone by that time, and Toller will, we hope, be incapable. There only remains Mrs. Toller, who might give the alarm. If you could send her into the cellar on some errand, and then turn the key upon her, you would facilitate matters immensely.
I will do it.



Excellent! We shall then look thoroughly into the affair. Of course there is only one feasible expla- nation. You have been brought there to personate someone, and the real person is imprisoned in this chamber. That is obvious. As to who this prisoner is, I have no doubt that it is the daughter, Miss Alice Rucastle, if I remember right, who was said to have gone to America. You were chosen, doubt- less, as resembling her in height, figure, and the colour of your hair. Hers had been cut off, very possibly in some illness through which she has passed, and so, of course, yours had to be sacri- ficed also. By a curious chance  you  came  upon her tresses. The man in the road was undoubtedly some friend of herspossibly her fianceand no doubt, as you wore the girls dress and were so like her, he was convinced from your laughter, when- ever he saw you, and afterwards from your gesture, that Miss Rucastle was perfectly happy, and that she no longer desired his attentions. The dog is let loose at night to prevent him from endeavouring to communicate with her. So much is fairly clear. The most serious point in the case is the disposition of the child.
What on earth has that to do with it? I ejacu- lated.
My dear Watson, you as a medical man are continually gaining light as to the tendencies of a child by the study of the parents. Dont you see  that the converse is equally valid. I have frequently gained my first real insight into the character of parents by studying their children. This childs dis- position is abnormally cruel, merely for crueltys sake, and whether he derives this from his smiling father, as I should suspect, or from his mother, it bodes evil for the poor girl who is in their power.
I am sure that you are right, Mr. Holmes, cried our client. A thousand things come back to me which make me certain that you have hit it. Oh, let us lose not an instant in bringing help to this poor creature.
We must be circumspect, for we are dealing with a very cunning man. We can do nothing until seven oclock. At that hour we shall be with you, and it will not be long before we solve the mystery.
We were as good as our word, for it was just seven when we reached the Copper Beeches, hav- ing put up our trap at a wayside public-house. The group of trees, with their dark leaves shining like burnished metal in the light of the setting sun, were sufficient to mark the house even had Miss Hunter not been standing smiling on the door-step.
Have you managed it? asked Holmes.
A loud thudding noise came from somewhere downstairs. That is Mrs. Toller in the cellar, said she. Her husband lies snoring on the kitchen rug. Here are his keys, which are the duplicates of Mr. Rucastles.
You have done well indeed! cried Holmes with enthusiasm. Now lead the way, and we shall soon see the end of this black business.
We passed up the stair, unlocked the door, fol- lowed on down  a  passage,  and  found  ourselves in front of the barricade which Miss Hunter had described. Holmes cut the cord and removed the transverse bar. Then he tried the various keys in the lock, but without success. No sound came from within, and at the silence Holmes face clouded over.
I trust that we are not too late, said he. I think, Miss Hunter, that we had better go in with- out you. Now, Watson, put your shoulder to it, and we shall see whether we cannot make our  way in. It was an old rickety door and gave at once be- fore our united strength. Together we rushed into
the room. It was empty. There was no furniture save a little pallet bed, a small table, and a basket- ful of linen. The skylight above was open, and the prisoner gone.
There has been some villainy here, said Holmes; this beauty has guessed Miss Hunters intentions and has carried his victim off.
But how?
Through the skylight. We shall soon see how he managed it. He swung himself up onto the roof. Ah, yes, he cried, heres the end of a long light ladder against the eaves. That is how he did it.
But it is impossible, said Miss Hunter; the ladder was not there when the Rucastles went away.
He has come back and done it. I tell you that he is a clever and dangerous man. I should not be very much surprised if this were he whose step I hear now upon the stair. I think, Watson, that it would be as well for you to have your pistol ready.
The words were hardly out of his mouth before a man appeared at the door of the room,  a very   fat and burly man, with a heavy stick in his hand. Miss Hunter screamed and shrunk against the wall at the sight of him, but Sherlock Holmes sprang forward and confronted him.
You villain! said he, wheres your daugh- ter?
The fat man cast his eyes round, and then up at the open skylight.
It is for me to ask you that, he shrieked, you thieves! Spies and thieves! I have caught you, have



I? You are in my power. Ill serve you! He turned and clattered down the stairs as hard as he could go.
Hes gone for the dog! cried Miss Hunter. I have my revolver, said I.
Better close the front door, cried Holmes, and we all rushed down the stairs together. We had hardly reached the hall when we heard the bay-  ing of a hound, and then a scream of agony,  with   a horrible worrying sound which it was  dreadful  to listen to. An elderly man with a red face and shaking limbs came staggering out at a side door.
My God! he cried. Someone has loosed the dog. Its not been fed for two days. Quick, quick,  or itll be too late!
Holmes and I rushed out and round the an- gle of the house, with Toller hurrying behind us. There was the huge famished brute, its black muz- zle buried in Rucastles throat, while he writhed and screamed upon the ground. Running up, I blew its brains out, and it fell over with its keen white teeth still meeting in the great creases of his neck. With much labour we separated them and carried him, living but horribly mangled, into the house. We laid him upon the drawing-room sofa, and having dispatched the sobered Toller to bear the news to his wife, I did what I could to relieve his pain. We were all assembled round him when the door opened, and a tall, gaunt woman entered the room.
Mrs. Toller! cried Miss Hunter.
Yes, miss. Mr. Rucastle let me out when he came back before he went up to you. Ah,  miss,  it is a pity you didnt let me know what you were planning, for I would have told you that your pains were wasted.
Ha! said Holmes, looking keenly at her. It is clear that Mrs. Toller knows more about this matter than anyone else.
Yes, sir, I do, and I am ready enough to tell what I know.
Then, pray, sit down, and let us hear it for there are several points on which I must confess that I am still in the dark.
I will soon make it clear to you, said she; and Id have done so before now if I could ha got out from the cellar. If theres police-court business over this, youll remember that I was the one that stood your friend, and that I was  Miss Alices friend  too.
She was never happy at home, Miss Alice wasnt, from the time that her father married again. She was slighted like and had no say in anything,
but it never really became bad for her until after she met Mr.  Fowler at a friends house.   As well   as I could learn, Miss Alice had rights of her own by will, but she was so quiet and patient, she was, that she never said a word about them but just left everything in Mr. Rucastles hands. He knew he was  safe with her;  but when there was  a chance  of a husband coming forward, who would ask for all that the law would give him, then her father thought it time to put a stop on it. He wanted her to sign a paper, so that whether she married or not, he could use her money. When she wouldnt do it, he kept on worrying her until she got brain-fever, and for six weeks was at deaths door.  Then she  got better at last, all worn to a shadow, and with her beautiful hair cut off; but that didnt make no change in her young man, and he stuck to her as true as man could be.
Ah, said Holmes, I think that what you have been good enough to tell us makes the matter fairly clear, and that I can deduce all that remains. Mr. Rucastle then, I presume, took to this system of imprisonment?
Yes, sir.
And brought Miss Hunter down from London in order to get rid of the disagreeable persistence of Mr. Fowler.
That was it, sir.
But Mr. Fowler being a persevering man, as a good seaman should be, blockaded the house, and having met you succeeded by certain arguments, metallic or otherwise, in convincing you that your interests were the same as his.
Mr. Fowler was a very kind-spoken, free- handed gentleman, said Mrs. Toller serenely.
And in this way he managed that your good man should have no want of drink, and that a lad- der should be ready at the moment when your master had gone out.
You have it, sir, just as it happened.
I am sure we owe you an apology, Mrs. Toller, said Holmes, for you have certainly cleared up everything which puzzled us. And here comes the country surgeon and Mrs. Rucastle, so I think, Wat- son, that we had best escort Miss Hunter back to Winchester, as it seems to me that our locus standi now is rather a questionable one.
And thus was solved the mystery of the sinister house with the copper beeches in front of the door. Mr. Rucastle survived, but was always a broken man, kept alive solely through the care of his de- voted wife. They still live with their old servants, who probably know so much of  Rucastles  past life that he finds it difficult to part from them. Mr.



Fowler and Miss Rucastle were married, by special license, in Southampton the day after their flight, and he is now the holder of a government appoint- ment in the island of Mauritius. As to Miss Violet Hunter, my friend Holmes, rather to my disappoint-
ment, manifested no further interest in her when once she had ceased to be the centre of one of his problems, and she is now the head of a private school at Walsall, where I believe that she has met with considerable success.







CONCERNING THESE STORIES

THERE are numerous time-honored stories which have become so incorporated into the literature and thought of our race that a knowledge of them is an indispensable part of ones education. These stories are of several different classes. To one class belong the popular fairy tales which have delighted untold generations of children, and will continue to delight them to the end of time. To another class belong the limited number of fables that have come down to us through many channels from hoar antiquity. To a third belong the charming stories of olden times that are derived from the literatures of ancient peoples, such as the Greeks and the Hebrews. A fourth class includes the half-legendary tales of a distinctly later origin, which have for their subjects certain romantic episodes in the lives of well-known heroes and famous men, or in the history of a people.
It is to this last class that most of the fifty stories contained in the present volume belong. As a matter of course, some of these stories are better known, and therefore more famous, than others. Some have a slight historical value; some are useful as giving point to certain great moral truths; others are products solely of the fancy, and are intended only to amuse. Some are derived from very ancient sources, and are current in the literature of many


lands; some have come to us through the ballads and folk tales of the English people; a few are of quite recent origin; nearly all are the subjects of frequent allusions in poetry and prose and in the conversation of educated people. Care has been taken to exclude everything that is not strictly within the limits of probability; hence there is here no trespassing upon the domain of the fairy tale, the fable, or the myth.
That children naturally take a deep interest in such stories, no person can deny; that the reading of them will not only give pleasure, but will help to lay the foundation for broader literary studies, can scarcely be doubted. It is believed, therefore, that the present collection will be found to possess all educative value which will commend it as a supplementary reader in the middle primary grades at school. It is also hoped that the book will prove so attractive that it will be in demand out of school as well as in.
Acknowledgments are due to Mrs. Charles A. Lane, by whom eight or ten of the stories were suggested.














KING ALFRED AND THE CAKES
MANY years ago there lived in England a wise and good king whose name was Alfred. No other man ever did so much for his country as he; and people now, all over the world, speak of him as Alfred the Great.
In those days a king did not have a very easy life. There was war almost all the time, and no one else could lead his army into battle so well as he. And so, between ruling and fighting, he had a busy time of it indeed.
A fierce, rude people, called the Danes, had come from over the sea, and were fighting the English. There were so many of them, and they were so bold and strong, that for a long time they gained every battle. If they kept on, they would soon be the masters of the whole country.
At last, after a great battle, the English army was broken up and scattered. Every man had to save himself in the best way he could. King Alfred fled alone, in great haste, through the woods and swamps.

FIFTY FAMOUS STORIES RETOLD

Late in the day the king came to the hut of a woodcutter. He was very tired and hungry, and he begged the woodcutters wife to give him something to eat and a place to sleep in her hut.
The woman was baking some cakes upon the hearth, and she looked with pity upon the poor, ragged fellow who seemed so hungry. She had no thought that he was the king.
Yes, she said, I will give you some supper if you will watch these cakes. I want to go out and milk the cow; and you must see that they do not burn while I am gone.
King Alfred was very willing to watch the cakes, but he had far greater things to think about. How was he going to get his army together again? And how was he going to drive the fierce Danes out of the land? He forgot his hunger; he forgot the cakes; he forgot that he was in the woodcutters hut. His mind was busy making plans for to-morrow.
In a little while the woman came back. The cakes were smoking on the hearth. They were burned to a crisp. Ah, how angry she was!
You lazy fellow! she cried. See what you have done! You want something to eat, but you do not want to work!
I have been told that she even struck the king with a stick; but I can hardly believe that she was so ill-natured.

KING ALFRED AND THE CAKES

 
The king must have laughed to himself at the thought of being scolded in this way; and he was so hungry that he did not mind the womans angry words half so much as the loss of the cakes.
I do not know whether he had anything to eat that night, or whether he had to go to bed without his supper. But it was not many days until he had gathered his men together again, and had beaten the Danes in a great battle.










KING ALFRED AND THE BEGGAR
AT one time the Danes drove King Alfred from his kingdom, and he had to lie hidden for a long time on a little island in a river.
One day, all who were on the island, except the king and queen and one servant, went out to fish. It was a very lonely place, and no one could get to it except by a boat. About noon a ragged beggar came to the kings door, and asked for food.
The king called the servant, and asked, How much food have we in the house?
My lord, said the servant, we have only one loaf and a little wine.
Then the king gave thanks to God, and said, Give half of the loaf and half of the wine to this poor man.
The servant did as he was bidden. The beggar thanked the king for his kindness, and went on his way.
In the afternoon the men who had gone out to fish came back. They had three boats full of fish,

KING ALFRED AND THE BEGGAR

and they said, We have caught more fish to-day than in all the other days that we have been on this island.
The king was glad, and he and his people were more hopeful than they had ever been before.
When night came, the king lay awake for a long time, and thought about the things that had happened that day. At last he fancied that he saw a great light like the sun; and in the midst of the light there stood an old man with black hair, holding an open book in his hand.
It may all have been a dream, and yet to the king it seemed very real indeed. He looked and wondered, but was not afraid.
Who are you? he asked of the old man. Alfred, my son, be brave, said the man; for
I am the one to whom you gave this day the half of all the food that you had. Be strong and joyful of heart, and listen to what I say. Rise up early in the morning and blow your horn three times, so loudly that the Danes may hear it. By nine oclock, five hundred men will be around you ready to be led into battle. Go forth bravely, and within seven days your enemies shall be beaten, and you shall go back to your kingdom to reign in peace.
Then the light went out, and the man was seen no more.
In the morning the king arose early, and crossed over to the mainland. Then he blew his horn


three times very loudly; and when his friends heard it they were glad, but the Danes were filled with fear.
At nine oclock, five hundred of his bravest soldiers stood around him ready for battle. He spoke, and told them what he had seen and heard in his dream; and when he had finished, they all cheered loudly, and said that they would follow him and fight for him so long as they had strength.
So they went out bravely to battle; and they beat the Danes, and drove them back into their own place. And King Alfred ruled wisely and well over all his people for the rest of his days.










KING CANUTE ON THE SEASHORE
A HUNDRED years or more after the time of Alfred the Great there was a king of England named Canute. King Canute was a Dane; but the Danes were not so fierce and cruel then as they had been when they were at war with King Alfred.
The great men and officers who were around King Canute were always praising him.
You are the greatest man that ever lived, one would say.
Then another would say, O king! there can never be another man so mighty as you.
And another would say, Great Canute, there is nothing in the world that dares to disobey you.
The king was a man of sense, and he grew very tired of hearing such foolish speeches.
One day he was by the seashore, and his officers were with him. They were praising him, as they were in the habit of doing. He thought that now he would teach them a lesson, and so he bade them


set his chair on the beach close by the edge of the water.


asked.
Am I the greatest man in the world? he

O  king!  they  cried,  there  is  no  one so

mighty as you.
Do all things obey me? he asked.
There is nothing that dares to disobey you, O king! they said. The world bows before you, and gives you honor.
Will the sea obey me? he asked; and he looked down at the little waves which were lapping the sand at his feet.
The foolish officers were puzzled, but they did not dare to say No.
Command it, O king! and it will obey, said
one.
Sea, cried Canute, I command you to
come no farther! Waves, stop your rolling, and do not dare to touch my feet!
But the tide came in, just as it always did. The water rose higher and higher. It came up around the kings chair, and wet not only his feet, but also his robe. His officers stood about him, alarmed, and wondering whether he was not mad.
Then Canute took off his crown, and threw it down upon the sand.

KING CANUTE ON THE SEASHORE



 

Sea, I command you to come no farther!


I shall never wear it again, he said. And do you, my men, learn a lesson from what you have seen. There is only one King who is all-powerful; and it is he who rules the sea, and holds the ocean in the hollow of his hand. It is he whom you ought to praise and serve above all others.










THE SONS OF WILLIAM THE CONQUEROR
THERE was once a great king of England who was called William the Conqueror, and he had three sons.
One day King William seemed to be thinking of something that made him feel very sad; and the wise men who were about him asked him what was the matter.
I am thinking, he said, of what my sons may do after I am dead. For, unless they are wise and strong, they cannot keep the kingdom which I have won for them. Indeed, I am at a loss to know which one of the three ought to be the king when I am gone.
O king! said the wise men, if we only knew what things your sons admire the most, we might then be able to tell what kind of men they will be. Perhaps, by asking each one of them a few questions, we can find out which one of them will be best fitted to rule in your place.


The plan is well worth trying, at least, said the king. Have the boys come before you, and then ask them what you please.
The wise men talked with one another for a little while, and then agreed that the young princes should be brought in, one at a time, and that the same questions should be put to each.
The first who came into the room was Robert. He was a tall, willful lad, and was nicknamed Short Stocking.
Fair sir, said one of the men, answer me this question: If, instead of being a boy, it had pleased God that you should be a bird, what kind of a bird would you rather be?
A hawk, answered Robert. I would rather be a hawk, for no other bird reminds one so much of a bold and gallant knight.
The next who came was young William, his fathers namesake and pet. His face was jolly and round, and because he had red hair he was nicknamed Rufus, or the Red.
Fair sir, said the wise man, answer me this question: If, instead of being a boy, it had pleased God that you should be a bird, what kind of a bird would you rather be?
An eagle, answered William. I would rather be an eagle, because it is strong and brave. It is feared by all other birds, and is therefore the king of them all.

THE SONS OF WILLIAM THE CONQUEROR

Lastly came the youngest brother, Henry, with quiet steps and a sober, thoughtful look. He had been taught to read and write, and for that reason he was nicknamed Beauclerc, or the Handsome Scholar.
Fair sir, said the wise man, answer me this question: If, instead of being a boy, it had pleased God that you should be a bird, what kind of a bird would you rather be?
A starling, said Henry. I would rather be a starling, because it is good-mannered and kind and a joy to every one who sees it, and it never tries to rob or abuse its neighbor.
Then the wise men talked with one another for a little while, and when they had agreed among themselves, they spoke to the king.
We find, said they, that your eldest son, Robert, will be bold and gallant. He will do some great deeds, and make a name for himself; but in the end he will be overcome by his foes, and will die in prison.
The second son, William, will be as brave and strong as the eagle but he will be feared and hated for his cruel deeds. He will lead a wicked life, and will die a shameful death.
The youngest son, Henry, will be wise and prudent and peaceful. He will go to war only when he is forced to do so by his enemies. He will be loved at home, and respected abroad; and he will die in peace after having gained great possessions.


Years passed by, and the three boys had grown up to be men. King William lay upon his death-bed, and again he thought of what would become of his sons when he was gone. Then he remembered what the wise men had told him; and so he declared that Robert should have the lands which he held in France, that William should be the King of England, and that Henry should have no land at all, but only a chest of gold.
So it happened in the end very much as the wise men had foretold. Robert, the Short Stocking, was bold and reckless, like the hawk which he so much admired. He lost all the lands that his father had left him, and was at last shut up in prison, where he was kept until he died.
William Rufus was so overbearing and cruel that he was feared and hated by all his people. He led a wicked life, and was killed by one of his own men while hunting in the forest.
And Henry, the Handsome Scholar, had not only the chest of gold for his own, but he became by and by the King of England and the ruler of all the lands that his father had had in France.










THE WHITE SHIP
KING HENRY, the Handsome Scholar, had one son named William, whom he dearly loved. The young man was noble and brave, and everybody hoped that he would some day be the King of England.
One summer Prince William went with his father across the sea to look after their lands in France. They were welcomed with joy by all their people there, and the young prince was so gallant and kind, that he won the love of all who saw him.
But at last the time came for them to go back to England. The king, with his wise men and brave knights, set sail early in the day; but Prince William with his younger friends waited a little while. They had had so joyous a time in France that they were in no great haste to tear themselves away.
Then they went on board of the ship which was waiting to carry them home. It was a beautiful ship with white sails and white masts, and it had been fitted up on purpose for this voyage.
The sea was smooth, the winds were fair and no one thought of danger. On the ship, everything


had been arranged to make the trip a pleasant one. There was music and dancing, and everybody was merry and glad.
The sun had gone down before the white- winged vessel was fairly out of the bay. But what of that? The moon was at its full, and it would give light enough; and before the dawn of the morrow, the narrow sea would be crossed. And so the prince, and the young people who were with him, gave themselves up to merriment and feasting and joy.
The earlier hours of the night passed by; and then there was a cry of alarm on deck. A moment afterward there was a great crash. The ship had struck upon a rock. The water rushed in. She was sinking. Ah, where now were those who had lately been so heart-free and glad?
Every heart was full of fear. No one knew what to do. A small boat was quickly launched, and the prince with a few of his bravest friends leaped into it. They pushed off just as the ship was beginning to settle beneath the waves. Would they be saved?
They had rowed hardly ten yards from the ship, when there was a cry from among those that were left behind.
Row back! cried the prince. It is my little sister. She must be saved!
The men did not dare to disobey. The boat was again brought alongside of the sinking vessel. The prince stood up, and held out his arms for his

THE WHITE SHIP

sister. At that moment the ship gave a great lurch forward into the waves. One shriek of terror was heard, and then all was still save the sound of the moaning waters.
Ship and boat, prince and princess, and all the gay company that had set sail from France, went down to the bottom together. One man clung to a floating plank, and was saved the next day. He was the only person left alive to tell the sad story.
When King Henry heard of the death of his son, his grief was more than he could bear. His heart was broken. He had no more joy in life; and men say that no one ever saw him smile again.
Here is a poem about him that your teacher may read to you, and perhaps, after a while, you may learn it by heart.


HE NEVER SMILED AGAIN

The bark that held the prince went down, The sweeping waves rolled on;
And what was Englands glorious crown To him that wept a son?
He lived, for life may long be borne Ere sorrow breaks its chain:
Why comes not death to those who mourn?
He never smiled again.

There stood proud forms before his throne, The stately and the brave;
But who could fill the place of one, That one beneath the wave?


Before him passed the young and fair, In pleasures reckless train;
But seas dashed oer his sons bright hair He never smiled again.

He sat where festal bowls went round; He heard the minstrel sing;
He saw the tourneys victor crowned Amid the knightly ring.
A murmur of the restless deep Was blent with every strain,
A voice of winds that would not sleep He never smiled again.

Hearts, in that time, closed oer the trace Of vows once fondly poured,
And strangers took the kinsmans place At many a joyous board;
Graves which true love had bathed with tears Were left to heavens bright rain;
Fresh hopes were born for other years
He never smiled again!

MRS. HEMANS










KING JOHN AND THE ABBOT

	THE THREE QUESTIONS


THERE was once a king of England whose name was John. He was a bad king; for he was harsh and cruel to his people, and so long as he could have his own way, he did not care what became of other folks. He was the worst king that England ever had.
Now, there was in the town of Canterbury a rich old abbot who lived in grand style in a great house called the Abbey. Every day a hundred noble men sat down with him to dine; and fifty brave knights, in fine velvet coats and gold chains, waited upon him at his table.
When King John heard of the way in which the abbot lived, he made up his mind to put a stop to it. So he sent for the old man to come and see him.
How now, my good abbot? he said. I hear that you keep a far better house than I. How dare you do such a thing? Dont you know that no man in


the land ought to live better than the king? And I tell you that no man shall.
O king! said the abbot, I beg to say that I am spending nothing but what is my own. I hope that you will not think ill of me for making things pleasant for my friends and the brave knights who are with me.
Think ill of you? said the king. How can I help but think ill of you? All that there is in this broad land is mine by right; and how do you dare to put me to shame by living in grander style than I? One would think that you were trying to be king in my place.
Oh, do not say so! said the abbot. For
I
Not another word! cried the king. Your
fault is plain, and unless you can answer me three questions, your head shall be cut off, and all your riches shall be mine.
I will try to answer them, O king! said the
abbot.
Well, then, said King John, as I sit here
with my crown of gold on my head, you must tell me to within a day just how long I shall live. Secondly, you must tell me how soon I shall ride round the whole world; and lastly, you shall tell me what I think.
O king! said the abbot, these are deep, hard questions, and I cannot answer them just now.


But if you will give me two weeks to think about them, I will do the best that I can.
Two weeks you shall have, said the king; but if then you fail to answer me, you shall lose your head, and all your lands shall be mine.
The abbot went away very sad and in great fear. He first rode to Oxford. Here was a great school, called a university, and he wanted to see if any of the wise professors could help him. But they shook their heads, and said that there was nothing about King John in any of their books.
Then the abbot rode down to Cambridge, where there was another university. But not one of the teachers in that great school could help him.
At last, sad and sorrowful, he rode toward home to bid his friends and his brave knights good- by. For now he had not a week to live.


	THE THREE ANSWERS

As the abbot was riding up the lane which led to his grand house, he met his shepherd going to the fields.
Welcome home, good master! cried the shepherd. What news do you bring us from great King John?
Sad news, sad news, said the abbot; and then he told him all that had happened.


Cheer up, cheer up, good master, said the shepherd. Have you never yet heard that a fool may teach a wise man wit? I think I can help you out of your trouble.
You help me! cried the abbot. How?
how?
Well, answered the shepherd, you know
that everybody says that I look just like you, and that I have sometimes been mistaken for you. So, lend me your servants and your horse and your gown, and I will go up to London and see the king. If nothing else can be done, I can at least die in your place.
My good shepherd, said the abbot, you are very, very kind; and I have a mind to let you try your plan. But if the worst comes to the worst, you shall not die for me. I will die for myself.
So the shepherd got ready to go at once. He dressed himself with great care. Over his shepherds coat he threw the abbots long gown, and he borrowed the abbots cap and golden staff. When all was ready, no one in the world would have thought that he was not the great man himself. Then he mounted his horse, and with a great train of servants set out for London.
Of course the king did not know him. Welcome, Sir Abbot! he said. It is a good
thing that you have come back. But, prompt as you
are, if you fail to answer my three questions, you shall lose your head.

 
You shall live until the day that you die.


I am ready to answer them, O king! said the shepherd.
Indeed, indeed! said the king, and he laughed to himself. Well, then, answer my first question: How long shall I live? Come, you must tell me to the very day.
You shall live, said the shepherd, until the day that you die, and not one day longer. And you shall die when you take your last breath, and not one moment before.
The king laughed.
You are witty, I see, he said. But we will let that pass, and say that your answer is right. And now tell me how soon I may ride round the world.
You must rise with the sun, said the shepherd, and you must ride with the sun until it rises again the next morning. As soon as you do that, you will find that you have ridden round the world in twenty-four hours.
The king laughed again. Indeed, he said, I did not think that it could be done so soon. You are not only witty, but you are wise, and we will let this answer pass. And now comes my third and last question: What do I think?
That is an easy question, said the shepherd. You think that I am the Abbot of Canterbury. But, to tell you the truth, I am only his poor shepherd, and I have come to beg your pardon for him and for me. And with that, he threw off his long gown.


The king laughed loud and long.
A merry fellow you are, said he, and you shall be the Abbot of Canterbury in your masters place.
O king! that cannot be, said the shepherd; for I can neither read nor write.
Very well, then, said the king, I will give you something else to pay you for this merry joke. I will give you four pieces of silver every week as long as you live. And when you get home, you may tell the old abbot that you have brought him a free pardon from King John.

IN the rude days of King Richard and King John there were many great woods in England. The most famous of these was Sherwood forest, where the king often went to hunt deer. In this forest there lived a band of daring men called outlaws.
They had done something that was against the laws of the land, and had been forced to hide themselves in the woods to save their lives. There they spent their time in roaming about among the trees, in hunting the kings deer, and in robbing rich travelers that came that way.
There were nearly a hundred of these outlaws, and their leader was a bold fellow called Robin Hood. They were dressed in suits of green, and armed with bows and arrows; and sometimes they carried long wooden lances and broad-swords, which they knew how to handle well. Whenever they had taken anything, it was brought and laid at the feet of Robin Hood, whom they called their king. He then divided it fairly among them, giving to each man his just share.


Robin never allowed his men to harm anybody but the rich men who lived in great houses and did no work. He was always kind to the poor, and he often sent help to them; and for that reason the common people looked upon him as their friend.
Long after he was dead, men liked to talk about his deeds. Some praised him, and some blamed him. He was, indeed, a rude, lawless fellow; but at that time, people did not think of right and wrong as they do now.
A great many songs were made up about Robin Hood, and these songs were sung in the cottages and huts all over the land for hundreds of years afterward.
Here is a little story that is told in one of those songs:
Robin Hood was standing one day under a green tree by the roadside. While he was listening to the birds among the leaves, he saw a young man passing by. This young man was dressed in a fine suit of bright red cloth; and, as he tripped gayly along the road, he seemed to be as happy as the day.
I will not trouble him, said Robin Hood, for I think he is on his way to his wedding.
The next day Robin stood in the same place. He had not been there long when he saw the same young man coming down the road. But he did not seem to be so happy this time. He had left his scarlet coat at home, and at every step he sighed and groaned.


Ah the sad day! the sad day! he kept saying to himself.
Then Robin Hood stepped out from under the tree, and said,
I say, young man! Have you any money to spare for my merry men and me?
I have nothing at all, said the young man, but five shillings and a ring.
A gold ring? asked Robin.
Yes, said the young man, it is a gold ring.
Here it is.
Ah, I see! said Robin; it is a wedding ring.
I have kept it these seven years, said the young man; I have kept it to give to my bride on our wedding day. We were going to be married yesterday. But her father has promised her to a rich old man whom she never saw. And now my heart is broken.
What is your name? asked Robin.
My name is Allin-a-Dale, said the young
man.
What will you give me, in gold or fee, said
Robin, if I will help you win your bride again in spite of the rich old man to whom she has been promised?



 


I have no money, said Allin, but I will promise to be your servant.
How many miles is it to the place where the maiden lives? asked Robin.


It is not far, said Allin. But she is to be married this very day, and the church is five miles away.
Then Robin made haste to dress himself as a harper; and in the afternoon he stood in the door of the church.
Who are you? said the bishop, and what are you doing here?
I am a bold harper, said Robin, the best in the north country.
I am glad you have come, said the bishop kindly. There is no music that I like so well as that of the harp. Come in, and play for us.
I will go in, said Robin Hood; but I will not give you any music until I see the bride and bride-groom.
Just then an old man came in. He was dressed in rich clothing, but was bent with age, and was feeble and gray. By his side walked a fair young girl. Her cheeks were very pale, and her eyes were full of tears.
This is no match, said Robin. Let the bride choose for herself.
Then he put his horn to his lips, and blew three times. The very next minute, four and twenty men, all dressed in green, and carrying long bows in their hands, came running across the fields. And as they marched into the church, all in a row, the foremost among them was Allin-a-Dale.


Now whom do you choose? said Robin to the maiden.
I choose Allin-a-Dale, she said blushing. And	Allin-a-Dale	you	shall	have,	said
Robin; and he that takes you from Allin-a-Dale shall find that he has Robin Hood to deal with.
And so the fair maiden and Allin-a-Dale were married then and there, and the rich old man went home in a great rage.

And thus having ended this merry wedding, The bride looked like a queen:
And so they returned to the merry green wood, Amongst the leaves so green.
THERE was once a king of Scotland whose name was Robert Bruce. He had need to be both brave and wise, for the times in which he lived were wild and rude. The King of England was at war with him, and had led a great army into Scotland to drive him out of the land.
Battle after battle had been fought. Six times had Bruce led his brave little army against his foes; and six times had his men been beaten, and driven into flight. At last his army was scattered, and he was forced to hide himself in the woods and in lonely places among the mountains.
One rainy day, Bruce lay on the ground under a rude shed, listening to the patter of the drops on the roof above him. He was tired and sick at heart, and ready to give up all hope. It seemed to him that there was no use for him to try to do anything more.
As he lay thinking, he saw a spider over his head, making ready to weave her web. He watched her as she toiled slowly and with great care. Six times she tried to throw her frail thread from one beam to another, and six times it fell short.

Poor thing! said Bruce: you, too, know what it is to fail.
But the spider did not lose hope with the sixth failure. With still more care, she made ready to try for the seventh time. Bruce almost forgot his own troubles as he watched her swing herself out upon the slender line. Would she fail again? No! The thread was carried safely to the beam, and fastened there.
I, too, will try a seventh time! cried Bruce.
He arose and called his men together. He told them of his plans, and sent them out with messages of cheer to his disheartened people. Soon there was an army of brave Scotchmen around him. Another battle was fought, and the King of England was glad to go back into his own country.
I have heard it said, that, after that day, no one by the name of Bruce would ever hurt a spider. The lesson which the little creature had taught the king was never forgotten.

IN Scotland, in the time of King Robert Bruce, there lived a brave man whose name was Douglas. His hair and beard were black and long, and his face was tanned and dark; and for this reason people nicknamed him the Black Douglas. He was a good friend of the king, and one of his strongest helpers.
In the war with the English, who were trying to drive Bruce from Scotland, the Black Douglas did many brave deeds; and the English people became very much afraid of him. By and by the fear of him spread all through the land. Nothing could frighten an English lad more than to tell him that the Black Douglas was not far away. Women would tell their children, when they were naughty, that the Black Douglas would get them; and this would make them very quiet and good.
There was a large castle in Scotland which the English had taken early in the war. The Scottish soldiers wanted very much to take it again, and the Black Douglas and his men went one day to see what they could do. It happened to be a holiday, and most of the English soldiers in the castle were eating


and drinking and having a merry time. But they had left watchmen on the wall to see that the Scottish soldiers did not come upon them unawares; and so they felt quite safe.
In the evening, when it was growing dark, the wife of one of the soldiers went up on the wall with her child in her arms. As she looked over into the fields below the castle, she saw some dark objects moving toward the foot of the wall. In the dusk, she could not make out what they were, and so she pointed them out to one of the watchmen.
Pooh, pooh! said the watchman. Those are nothing to frighten us. They are the farmers cattle, trying to find their way home. The farmer himself is enjoying the holiday, and he has forgotten to bring them in. If the Douglas should happen this way before morning, he will be sorry for his carelessness.
But the dark objects were not cattle. They were the Black Douglas and his men, creeping on hands and feet toward the foot of the castle wall. Some of them were dragging ladders behind them through the grass. They would soon be climbing to the top of the wall. None of the English soldiers dreamed that they were within many miles of the place.
The woman watched them until the last one had passed around a corner out of sight. She was not afraid, for in the darkening twilight they looked indeed like cattle. After a little while she began to sing to her child:



Hush ye, hush ye, little pet ye, Hush ye, hush ye, do not fret ye,
The Black Douglas shall not get ye.

 
Dont be so sure about that!



All at once a gruff voice was heard behind her, saying, Dont be so sure about that!
She looked around, and there stood the Black Douglas himself. At the same moment a Scottish soldier climbed off a ladder and leaped upon the wall; and then there came another and another and another, until the wall was covered with them. Soon there was hot fighting in every part of the castle. But the English were so taken by surprise that they could not do much. Many of them were killed, and in a little while the Black Douglas and his men were the masters of the castle, which by right belonged to them.
As for the woman and her child, the Black Douglas would not suffer any one to harm them. After a while they went back to England; and whether the mother made up any more songs about the Black Douglas I cannot tell.
 
